Part one

While working as a “system hacker” in MIT's AI Lab (i.e. a member of the team
developing the Lab's own operating system) he experienced the profound change
that overtook the software industry. Up until that point the general practice
was for people to freely share, modify and reuse operating system software
developed for the machines of the day. In the 1970's the software industry
stopped distributing the source code of these programs, making it impossible
for computer users to study and modify them. Furthermore new copyright laws
made it illegal to do so.

The change struck him as unethical, and it affected him personally as the
hacker community in which he thrived was broken up as two competing companies
hired most of the talent in the Lab to develop nonfree products. Stallman went
against the trend and decided to devote his life to the development of free
software, where the user has the right to use the program in any way he sees
fit, study the source code, modify it and even redistribute his modified
versions to others. In 1984 he quit the MIT AI Lab and started developing GNU,
the first free operating system which today, with the addition of a piece of
software developed by a young Finish student, Linus Torvalds, forms GNU/Linux.

Today, it is run on the majority of servers on the Internet, academic
institutions, large enterprises, the military, and on desktops of millions of
people around the world who have rejected software licenses that come with
Windows and Mac OS. They choose to run a system that was started by Stallman
and further developed by thousands of others over the Internet. GNU/Linux is
superior to proprietary software from a technical point of view, and it's
available gratis, but Stallman insists that these are welcome, but secondary
features. Freedom is the key. We start the conversation talking about
electronic rights.

You've said “in the Internet age we have less rights that in the physical
world.”

Yes. For instance in The US, Internet service providers can disconnect you
without going to court, they don't have to prove that there is a reason.
And as a result they can censor you. If you want to print papers and stand
on the street handing them out you can do that, you don't have to beg some
company to “please cooperate” so that you can do it. But to do this on the
Internet you need the cooperation of an ISP and a domain name registrar and
maybe a hosting service, and if they don't like what you're doing or
somebody threatens them who has a lot of power and doesn't like what you're
doing, then they can just terminate your service and censor you.

People should have a legal right to continued service of any of these kinds
as long as they fulfill their side of the bargain. I believe it's the case
in the US that the phone company can't arbitrarily disconnect your phone
line as long as you continue paying your bill and so on, then they have to
keep giving you phone service, it's not their choice. It should be the same
with Internet connectivity. It shouldn't be their choice, they shouldn't be
allowed to set their own conditions for continuing to give you service.
They should provide the service as a public utility?

Exactly.  This dependence on a corporation also extends to financial
transactions.

That's the other aspect in which the digital world gives us less rights
than the physical world. Suppose in addition to handing out papers on the
street, you'd like to ask people to give money to the cause. They can give
cash, and you can accept the cash, and you don't need the cooperation of
any company in order to do so. Once you receive the cash, it's valid money,
and you can spend it. But, to do the same thing in the digital world you
need the services of a payment company, and those companies might
arbitrarily disconnect you also.  This is what happened with WikiLeaks.
After it released information that embarrassed the US government (among
others), MasterCard and Visa stop accepting donations for the site.

Exactly. WikiLeaks showed all these vulnerabilities because the US
government decided to silence them and did everything they could to do so.
It has caused a lot of harm although you can still access the WikiLeaks
pages if you use the right domain name. They did manage to cut off most of
the donations to WikiLeaks, and now it's having trouble operating.  The
organization has received a lot of bad publicity in the US. What's your
view?

WikiLeaks is doing something heroic. A lot of the press in the US is
subservient to the government, this is true in a lot of countries. Or you
might better say that it's subservient to business, but the US government
works for business, so business wants to say good things about it. I think
we need laws stopping the payment companies from disconnecting anybody's
service, except when they prove that they have cause.  Technology has
spawned new forms of control, but it has also resulted in new ways of
protest, self-organization, and dissent. Anonymous stands out as an example
of hacktivists.

Anonymous does various different things. Most often Anonymous has a lot of
people go to the door of an organization's website, they're a crowd, and so
they may get in somebody's way. This is comparable to protesting in front
of the organization's building in the physical world. And that we recognize
as democratic political activity. So Anonymous' web protests are also
democratic political activity. Of course, the forces of oppression want to
define this as a crime rather than a protest, and they're using the change
in technology as an opportunity effectively to criminalize protests.

Another thing that I think maybe Anonymous' members have done, is changing
the text in the websites so as to criticize the organization whose site it
is. This is the virtual equivalent of writing a critical slogan on a
poster, which is pretty normal democratic political activity, but they call
it “attacking” the site. The word “attack” is meant to give people the idea
that this is something other than a political protest and put people in
prison for protesting.  Among hackers the term “hacker” means something
completely different than what it means to the general public. Could you
explain that difference?

Starting from 40 years ago, when I joined the hacker community at MIT, I've
been proud to call myself a hacker. I was hired by MIT to be a system
hacker, meaning to make the system better. At the time, we used an
operating system called ITS, the Incompatible Timesharing System, which had
been developed by the team of hackers at the Artificial Intelligence Lab;
and then they hired me to be part of the team. My job was to make the
system better. Hacking had a more general meaning, which meant basically
being playfully clever and pushing the limits of what was possible.
Hacking doesn't even have to involve computers.

Hacking was not limited in improving the operating system. You could hack
in any media, it didn't have to involve computers. Hacking, as a general
concept, is an attitude towards life. What's fun for you? If finding
playful clever ways that were thought impossible is fun then you're a
hacker. One thing that was supposed to be impossible was breaking the
security on computers. So some people who were inclined to be hackers got
into that medium of breaking security. Then journalists found about hackers
around 1981, misunderstood them, and they thought hacking was breaking
security. That's not generally true: first of all, there are many ways of
hacking that have nothing to do with security, and second, breaking
security is not necessarily hacking. It's only hacking if you're being
playfully clever about it.

Software Patents

Apart from electronic rights you are also a campaigner against software
patents. Companies like Amazon, Google, and Apple, to name a few, are currently
engaged in heated patent wars.

Patents are like land mines for software developers. It doesn't surprise me
that a product such as an Android phone is accused of violating a
tremendous number of patents, because it's a complicated software system.
Any such complicated software system is going to have thousands of ideas in
it, and if 10% of these ideas are patented that means hundreds of those
ideas are patented. So any large program is likely to run afoul of hundreds
of patents, and a system that's a combination of many programs is likely to
run afoul of thousands of patents or more.  As the law stands, these
patents have an expiration date of 20 years from the moment they were
filed.

This is a very long time in the software field. Keep in mind that any time
the technological context changes, then we need to adapt our way of doing
many things to fit the new context. Which means they will all need new
ideas, and if those new ideas are patented it's yet another disaster.
What's special about software that you think it should not have the patent
system apply to it?

Software is not the usual kind of case for patents. Let's look at the usual
case: patents for something that's made in a factory. Those patents only
affect the companies that have the factories and make the products. If they
can all live with the patent system the rest of us have no reason to care.
But with software, the problem is that it is much more complicated than
anything else. The reason is software is inherently easier to design than
physical products.

Software is simply mathematics, whereas physical products have to cope with
the perversity of matter. And lots of unexpected things will happen, we
have models to try to predict what will happen with physical systems, but
they're not guaranteed to be right.

With software you're using mathematical constructs, and they do what
they're defined to do, and if they don't then you go to the compiler
developer, and you say, “There's a bug in your compiler. Fix it so that
this construct does what is supposed to do.”

You can't do that to the physical world, but you can do that to the
compiler developer. Because of this it's easier to design software, but
people push every ability to its limit. So you give people an easier kind
of design, and they make bigger systems.

So with software, a few people in a few years can design something that has
a million elements in its design. That would be a mega-project if it had to
be made with physical matter. So you make the system so complicated, and
it's going to have lots of ideas in it, and that means that it's going to
infringe lots of patents or at least be accused of infringing lots of
patents.

In other words, the burden of the patent system on software is much higher
that it is on anything else. All software developers are in danger, and
what you see with the patent wars that have broken out in the past year or
so is if you develop a big complicated software package you're going to be
sued.  How is it different, say, to the patent for a drug?

Patents on medicine are another special case. Because when you force poor
countries to have patents on medicines, which is what the World Trade
Organization does, that makes medicine so expensive that people can't
afford it and they die.

The people who founded the WTO and its executives should be sent to the
Hague to be tried for mass murder. We should organize to demand that our
governments stop their support for the WTO; there are thousands of reasons
for that. That organization's purpose is to give business more power to
turn democracy into a sham.

All so-called “free trade treaties” are actually aimed to weaken democracy
and transfer political power to business. Therefore in the name of
democracy we must abolish those treaties. There are good arguments that
international trade can make both countries wealthier, and if these
countries are democratic enough that the wealth will spread to everyone in
both countries then they really are better off. However, the so-called
“free trade treaties” are designed to make the countries less democratic
and ensure that the wealth won't spread around.

That means that they cancel out whatever benefit they might produce even if
the GNP of both countries increases. What good is that if the increases all
go to the rich, which is what they've done in the US at least since 1980.
These patent wars have seen companies buying up an arsenal of software
patents just to protect themselves from litigation…

You know they might be, but it could be that Google has fewer patents
because it hasn't existed so long. This may be one case where they're not
all in the same position and not all interdependent, and if so, that would
be unfortunate, because after all Android is the only smartphone operating
system still in use that is mostly free software, and that at least gives
us a starting point to try to run phones without proprietary software.

If Android becomes dangerous and is crushed by patents, then we might never
be able to run smartphones with free software.  Google is about to buy
Motorola, which is not doing great financially, just in order to get access
to its patents.

This shows how the patent system becomes an obstruction to progress. When
there are enough patents applying to one product it becomes hard to cope
with the patent system at all. I hope that they (Google) succeed that way,
in protecting themselves, because by doing so they are to some extent
sheltering the free software community as well.  Do you believe in the
complete abolition of software patents?

Right, patents should not apply to software. Keep in mind that you can't
always classify patents as either software patents or non-software patents.
Sometimes the same patent will apply both to programs and to circuits. What
I recommend is to change the law to say “by definition, if it's a program,
it does not infringe any patents.”

P2P File Sharing and the Music/Film Industry

You've often spoken against the use of the word “piracy”.

    It's a smear term! They want to say that sharing is the moral equivalent of
    attacking ships. I don't agree with that position, so I don't call sharing
    “piracy”. I call it “sharing”.

    I am not against profit in general. I'm against mistreating people. Any
    given way of doing business may or may not involve mistreating people.

    The example of the struggling artist is a ridiculous example because the
    existing system does very little for struggling artists. It's lousy. And if
    we just legalize sharing it won't make any difference to struggling
    artists. It might even help them.

    I think artists should release music with licenses that explicitly permit
    sharing, and some of them do. The point is that this argument against
    sharing is bogus.

    These giant multinational companies want more money for themselves, and
    they use the artist as an excuse. Little bit trickles down to the artists,
    and then there are few stars that get treated very well. But we don't need
    to make them richer.  People should have the right to non-commercially
    share and redistribute music?

    Music and any published work. Because sharing is good, sharing builds
    community, so sharing must be legal, now that sharing is feasible and easy.

    Fifty years ago making copies and redistributing them non-commercially was
    so hard that it didn't matter whether it was legal or not. But now that
    it's so easy, to stop people from doing it can only be achieved using
    nasty, draconian measures, and even those don't always work.

    But, I guess, when they get nasty enough they may work, but why should we
    tolerate such nastiness?  The music and film industry campaigned very hard
    on PIPA, SOPA, and ACTA.

    They want unjust laws all around the world, and in some countries they've
    succeeded getting them. I read that Ireland adopted a law similar to SOPA,
    at least described that way, but I don't know any details yet.

    These laws are an injustice. They are meant to subject people more to the
    media companies, so of course they're wrong, of course people hate them.
    The only question is; is there enough democracy left in any given country
    for people to be able to stop them?

    European citizens should take action and organize with others so as to get
    your country not to ratify ACTA and convince the European Parliament to
    vote it down. Save the world from that injustice.  Recently government
    agencies acted to shut down a few sites, such as Mega-Upload.

    I don't know whether Mega-Upload ultimately would deserve to be shut down.
    Remember Mega-Upload is a business, not an example of sharing. Sharing
    means non-commercial redistribution of exact copies. So I don't have a
    conclusion about Mega-Upload in particular.

    I do think there was something outrageous about the way it was shut down,
    before a court got to decide whether it's legal or not. But meanwhile
    there's been a law suit against (I guess it's called) Hotfile and the
    plaintiffs are claiming that “this has to be bad because it's similar to
    Mega-Upload which we shut down.” Which is a swindle because no court has
    decided whether Mega-Upload was legal. So they're citing this premature
    shutdown as proof that it's bad.

    I don't know, maybe it is bad. That's not the issue I'm strongly concerned
    with. I'm more concerned with peer-to-peer sharing because that's clearly
    good.

On Privacy

What about services like Facebook and Gmail?

    There are many issues of freedom in life, and having control of your
    computing is my contribution—I hope—to the idea of what human rights are.
    There are many other human rights people deserve, and many of them that
    apply in other areas of life carry over to the virtual world.

    So for instance, what are the bad things about Facebook? Well, it gives
    people a false impression of privacy. It lets you think that you can
    designate something as to be seen only by your friends, not realizing that
    it's actually to be seen by your Facebook friends and not your actual
    friends. And any of them could publish it, so it could be seen by anybody;
    it could be published in the newspaper. Facebook can't prevent that.

    What it could do is warn the users every time they start a session “Watch
    out, anything you post here—even if you say that only certain people should
    see it—it could get published due to events beyond your control. So think
    twice about anything you are going to post here. And remember that, the
    next time you try to apply for a job, the company might demand that you
    show everything in your account. Your school might also demand this. And if
    you really want your communication to be private, do not send it this way.”
    That's one thing that they should do.

    Facebook is a surveillance engine and collects tremendous amounts of
    personal data, and its business model is to abuse that data. So you
    shouldn't use Facebook at all.

    And worse than that, Facebook even does surveillance on people that don't
    have Facebook accounts. If you see a “Like” button in a page then Facebook
    knows that your computer visited that page. And it's not the only company
    that's doing this; I believe that Twitter does this and Google+ does this,
    so it's a practice that's being imitated. And it's wrong no matter who does
    it.

    The other thing that Facebook does, is that it uses people's pictures in
    commercial advertisement and gives them no way to refuse.  Eric Schmidt of
    Google fame said a couple of years ago that if you have something you don't
    want anyone to know, maybe you shouldn't be doing it.

    That's ridiculous. What kind of things would you not anyone to know?

    Maybe you are planning a protest. It is common nowadays for governments to
    label dissidents as terrorists and use electronic surveillance on them to
    sabotage their protests in order to effectively sabotage democracy.  These
    social media also claim that they have had a very strong, subversive role
    in the Middle-East uprisings.

    Maybe they do, but remember that these are not located in these
    Middle-Eastern countries so they have no strong motive to care to those
    governments.

    When, say, the US government wants to crush dissent these companies are
    likely to volunteer to help. If they don't, they will be compelled to
    anyway.  You're also known to not use a mobile phone in order to protect
    your privacy.

    Of course. Every mobile phone is a tracking and surveillance device. You
    could stop your phone from transmitting your GPS location if you've got a
    phone that's controlled by free software, although those are very few.
    Still the system can determine pretty accurately where the phone is even
    without any active cooperation from the phone.

    The US government says it should be able to collect all that information
    without even a warrant. Not even a court order, that is. So that shows how
    much US government respects human rights.  Some people have been using TOR
    and other software to hide their identities online.

    TOR is a very good thing. It helps protect people from Big Brother. And by
    Big Brother I mean perhaps the government of Iran or Syria or the US or any
    other country that doesn't recognize human rights.

Part two

The second part of the interview is about free software and its functions.

In the second part of the interview we started off by speaking about free
software and asked for a definition.

Free software means software that respects user's freedom and user's community.
With software there are just two possibilities; either the user controls the
program or the program controls the users.

The first case is free software because, in order for the users to have
effective control of the programs, we need certain freedoms. Those freedoms are
the criteria of free software.

If the users don't control the program, then the program controls the users,
and the developer controls the program. That means that program is an
instrument of unjust power.

So free software is software that respects user's freedom, and the idea of the
free software movement is: nonfree software is an injustice, let's put an end
to it. First let's escape, and then let's help everyone else escape. Let's put
an end to that injustice.

And by free of course, you don't just mean just “gratis”, you mean a lot more
than that.

    I mean “free” as in freedom.  You mentioned that there are certain freedoms
    that a piece of software should respect in order to be called free. What
    are these freedoms?

    Freedom zero The freedom to run the program as you wish.  Freedom one The
    Freedom to study the source code and change it to make the program do your
    computing the way you wish.  Freedom two The freedom to help others, which
    means, redistribute exact copies when you wish.  Freedom three The freedom
    to contribute to your community—the freedom to distribute copies of your
    modified versions when you wish. (That's assuming that you've made modified
    version, because not everybody does that.)

And in order to support this you started a foundation, the Free Software
Foundation.

    Well, remember the goal is not just theoretical. I wanted to make it
    possible to use a computer in freedom. That's impossible if you're required
    to use nonfree software, and when I started this in 1983 that was the only
    way you could make a computer run. It had to have an operating system, and
    all the operating systems were proprietary, so you had to have nonfree
    software. (Proprietary means nonfree; they're synonymous.)

    So to make freedom a real option it was necessary to develop a free
    software operating system. I wanted to make it a real possibility to use a
    computer and have freedom, and that meant launching a software developing
    project to develop all the software that you need to have, and that's an
    operating system called GNU. That's why there was actual work to be done. I
    wanted to go beyond simply stating a philosophical point in the abstract,
    and proceed to the practical work of making freedom a real possibility.
    And why do you feel that it's an inherent right of people to have access to
    the source code of a program?

    Why should people be free? There are people that don't believe in freedom,
    and you can't logically argue with them. There's a fundamental difference
    in values. Once you recognize that having control over your software is the
    only way to live in freedom and use computers, if you want freedom you've
    got to insist on free software.  But why is software unlike other products?
    When a vendor sells a chair he expects… [Stallman interrupts]

    Software isn't like those things. Software does complicated things, and
    chairs don't. There's no way to design a chair to do things to you and
    control what you do. You normally sit on a chair and you control how you
    sit. The chair might be more or less comfortable, but it's not going to
    move you into a different building or dump you into the street or all sorts
    of other surprising things that you might not expect. It's not likely to
    have a needle hidden in it which would inject some kind of drug into you.

    Software, on the other hand, does things far more complicated than that,
    and proprietary software commonly has malicious features comparable to that
    needle. In Windows, people have found spy features. There are also back
    doors which allow those who know how to control them to do things to the
    user.

    In other words, Microsoft can do absolutely anything to the users of
    Windows: it has total control over their computers, it can take anything
    from them, it can sabotage them in any way at all. If you use nonfree
    programs you are defenseless against its developer, and the developers
    basically say “you should simply trust us because of course a big
    corporation like this would never hurt you.” Apart from software, companies
    today try to interfere with what users can actually store in their devices.
    One of their tools for controlling the user is by using proprietary e-book
    formats.

    These are attacks on the traditional freedoms of readers. The example I
    would use is the Amazon “swindle” (a play on words on Amazon's e-book
    tablet, the “Kindle”) because that's the one I know the most facts about. I
    call it the “swindle” because it is set up so that it swindles readers out
    of the traditional freedoms of readers of books.

    For instance, there is the freedom to own a book, which Amazon says the
    users can't. They can only get a license to read the book under Amazon's
    choice of conditions. Then there's the freedom to acquire the book
    anonymously, which is basically impossible for most well-known books with
    the “swindle”.

    They're only available from Amazon, and Amazon requires users to identify
    themselves, as it doesn't allow any way to pay anonymously with cash, the
    way you could buy a printed book. As a result Amazon maintains a database
    showing all the books that each user has ever read. That database is a
    threat to human rights. Then there's the freedom to give the book to
    someone else, perhaps after reading it, the freedom to lend the book to
    people when you wish, and the freedom to sell the book to a used book
    store.

    Amazon eliminates these freedoms, partially by means of digital handcuffs
    (malicious features in the software designed to restrict users so they
    can't do these things) and partially through having said that users can't
    own a book, because Amazon makes them sign a contract saying they won't
    give away, lend or sell the book. And then there's the freedom to keep the
    book as long as you wish.  There was an Orwellian twist to the tale…

    Yes, because they deleted thousands of copies of “1984”. That was in 2009.
    Those copies were authorized copies until the day Amazon decided to delete
    them. After this, there was a lot of criticism, and so Amazon promised it
    would never do this again unless ordered to by the state. I do not find
    that comforting.

    Any one of these makes the “swindle”—an outrageous attack on our freedom
    and something that we must refuse to use. I don't know all the details
    about the competitors, but all of them share at least some of these
    unacceptable characteristics. Except for some where you can only install
    books that are in documented, non-secret formats.

    Some of them maybe you could buy with cash somewhere if the author is
    selling copies. But the problem is, for digital books in general, there is
    no way to buy them for cash, or anonymously, because of the fact that there
    is no anonymous payment system on the Internet.

    Bitcoin can be used for that, but Bitcoin is somewhat speculative because
    its value fluctuates. I don't think it has arrived at the point of being a
    convenient easy, anonymous, digital payment system.

    And it's not inherently anonymous. You can make a Bitcoin payment
    anonymously but you have to go to some extra trouble. I don't remember the
    details, but it was complicated enough that I didn't think I would do it. I
    would just continue not buying things online.  There is another aspect to
    using nonfree software: you are being a bad neighbor as well.

    When you are asked to promise not to share with other people, what does
    that mean? You are being asked to betray your community. Now, what's your
    community? It's the people you know, the people you normally cooperate
    with. These software licenses invite you to betray the people you normally
    cooperate with.  People use the terms free & open source indiscriminately,
    but they are different things.

    The term “open source” was coined in 1998 by people in the free software
    community. Remember that I started the free software movement in 1983. By
    1998 we had already achieved a considerable amount, there were many people
    writing free software and many people using it.

    But not all of them agreed with the philosophy of the free software
    movement. Many of them, although they liked using and developing free
    software, considered our philosophy too radical and shocking. They coined a
    different term so that they could avoid any reference to our philosophy and
    avoid presenting the issue as a matter of justice versus injustice.

    So that's the purpose of the term “open source”. It's to talk about more or
    less the same category of software but without presenting it as an ethical
    issue. They don't say that if a program is not open source then it's an
    injustice and you must try to escape from it.  You've said in the past that
    the “the agenda of the free software movement has been subverted and even
    nearly lost.” Are you referring to cases such as Android (the mobile phone
    operating system)?

    Android is just one example of the general tendency for most people in a
    community not to think of this in terms of freedom and justice. “Open
    source” is a large part of that too.

    And then look at the more than 1000 different distributions of the
    GNU/Linux OS: there around ten of them which are entirely free software,
    whose developers keep them free software as a matter of principle, and the
    other thousand-or-so include nonfree software or steer the user towards
    nonfree software, which in an instant grants legitimacy to the nonfree
    software and directly rejects the philosophy of the free software movement.

    And these speak a very loud voice. Most people coming into the community
    formulate their ideas of what it's all about based on those distributions
    and from other people who are happy with those, and basically only a
    minority of the free software community regards nonfree software as an
    injustice that we shouldn't tolerate. And these views, of course,
    propagate.

    Strictly speaking Android is free software but it's not complete: in order
    to actually run a phone you need other software which isn't free. Every
    Android phone needs some nonfree software too.

    In addition, many of those are “tyrant products” which don't allow users to
    replace the system. So the software in them may have been made from free
    source code, but if the user can't replace the software, then those
    executable programs are not free.  Despite your technical achievements when
    it comes to coding, one of your greatest hacks was the inception of GNU
    GPL, a seminal license that influenced a lot of others.

    Well, it's better to say that most other free software licenses were
    written as reaction against the ideas of GNU GPL.

    You see, the GNU GPL is a copyleft license. Every free software license, in
    order to be one, has to give you the four freedoms. The only way to get
    these freedoms is if the work is released under a license that gives them
    to you.

    Copyright law today has been made too restricted, everything is copyrighted
    by default. Therefore the only way a program can be free is if the
    copyright holders put on a formal declaration that gives the four freedoms.
    This formal declaration is what we call a free software license.

    There are many ways to do that. Copyleft says that there is a condition
    placed on freedoms two and three (remember those were the freedoms to
    distribute exact copies and copies of your modified versions). The
    condition which is copyleft says that when you're distributing them, you
    have to do it respecting the same freedoms for the next person.

    So people who get copies from you, whether they're modified or not, must
    get the same four freedoms. If you put some of this code into another
    program with other code so that you've made changes, the conditions say
    that that entire program must give people the four freedoms, so you cannot
    convert the code into effectively proprietary with the excuse that you've
    made some changes in it. If you want to use any of this code in your
    program, you must make your whole program free.

    I did this because I realized that there was a choice: either people would
    be able to convert my code into nonfree software and use it to subjugate
    others, perhaps by making changes in it, or I would stop them from doing
    that.

    I realized then, if I didn't stop them, then my code would be converted to
    nonfree software, users would get my code, but they wouldn't get freedom,
    and that would be self defeating, it would defeat the whole purpose of
    writing the code, which was to make a system that they could use in
    freedom.

    So I invented a way to prevent that, and that way is copyleft.  And how do
    these ideas of copyleft translate in today's world of web services and so
    called “cloud computing”?

    These issues apply to a program, which is a work you can have a copy of;
    but a service isn't something you get a copy of, so these issues don't
    apply to it.

    On the other hand, when you're doing your own computing you must not use
    any web service to do that, because if you do so you lose control of that
    computing. If your computing is done on somebody else's server, he controls
    it and you don't.

    So the general issue that the user should have control on their computing
    does apply to web services but in a different way.  Despite it's practical
    advantages there isn't yet mass migration to free software in the public
    sector.

    Proprietary software developers have lots of money. They use that money to
    buy governments. There are two ways that they can use money to influence
    governments.

    One way is by bribing specific officials. That's typically illegal but in
    many countries they can do it anyway.

    The other way is bribing the state itself or some other jurisdiction, and
    that's not illegal, but it is equally corrupt.  Despite being in dire
    financial straights, there is no national policy in Greece regarding the
    use of free software in the public sector.

    I don't want to focus narrowly on the agendas of possibly saving money
    because that's a secondary reason. The real reason why the Greek and any
    other government should insist on using free software is to have control of
    its own computing, in other words, its information and computing
    sovereignty. And this is worth spending money for.  Let's talk a bit about
    the role that free software should have in education. There's been a lot of
    debate recently.

    Schools must teach exclusively free software because schools have a social
    mission: to educate good citizens for a strong, capable, independent,
    cooperating and free society. In the computing field that means teaching
    people to be skilled free software users.

    Teaching the proprietary program is implanting dependence. Why do you think
    many software companies hand gratis copies of their nonfree programs to
    schools? Because they want schools to spread this dependence. That's the
    opposite of the social mission of schools, they shouldn't do it.

    It's like giving students addictive drugs. The companies that make these
    drugs would love the schools to do that, but it's the school's
    responsibility to refuse even if the drugs are gratis. But there is a
    deeper reason too: for education and citizenship.

    Schools are supposed to teach not just facts and skills, but also the
    spirit of good will. A habit of helping others. Every class should have
    this rule: “Students, if you bring software to class you may not keep it
    for yourself. You must share copies with the rest of the class, including
    the source code, in case someone here wants to learn about that software.
    Which means bringing nonfree software to class is not permitted.” For the
    school to set a good example, it must follow its own rule: it should bring
    only free software and share copies with everyone in the class.

    There is also another reason, for the sake of education, specifically
    education of the best programmers. For natural born programmers to become
    good programmers, they need to read lots of code and write lots of code.
    Only free software gives you the chance to read the code of large programs
    that people really use. Then you have to write lots of code. Which means
    you've got to write code in large programs.

    You have to start small. That doesn't mean writing small programs, because
    small programs do not even start to present the difficulties of large
    programs. So the way you start small is by writing small changes in
    existing large programs, and only free software gives you the chance to do
    that.

    So, for several reasons, doing an ethical and good education means doing
    education with free software and only free software. There are many who
    say, “Let's give the children Windows and the GNU+Linux system so that they
    can learn both.” This is like saying “let's give children at lunchtime some
    whiskey or ouzo as well as water, so they can learn both.”

    The school is supposed to teach good habits, not addiction, not dependence.
    Microsoft knows that if you deliver computer with Windows and GNU+Linux,
    most of the kids in their families see Windows in use, so they are going to
    mostly use Windows.

    We need to change that, that's a bad habit of society, it's dependence. A
    school should actively put an end to that dependence. They should redirect
    society down to a path where people have freedom.

    But remember, the problem we want to correct is bigger than Microsoft.
    Apple is actually nastier than Microsoft, and it seems to be having a very
    disappointing success in the area of mobile devices with the iThings.

    And remember that the iThings pioneered a tyrannical practice that
    Microsoft only tried afterwards. That is designing products as jails, so
    that users can't even choose what applications to install freely, they can
    only install programs that have been approved by the dictator.

    And the horrible thing is that the evil genius Steve Jobs found a way to
    make lots of people clamor to be imprisoned by these products. He made
    jails and made them so shiny that people want to be locked up.

    There's been a tremendous PR industry keen to make him sound good, and
    Apple was working very hard to take advantage of his death. Of course
    Apple's PR worked while he was alive also, and there seem to be a lot of
    people in magazines and newspapers who want to direct the public attention
    away from these issues of freedom.  Speaking of education, when you were
    part of the MIT AI Lab, you were part of a community. This was eventually
    broken up and you were the only one to go against the trend and not work
    for a big company developing proprietary software. What gave you the
    strength to fight, alone, like a guerrilla in the mountains?

    I was alone already. The community I've been part of had already split up
    in a rather hostile fashion. So I was most definitely alone no matter what
    I was going to do.

    But the other thing was that the revulsion of my mind to the idea of using
    and developing proprietary software meant that that was even worse. I had
    no alternative that would lead to a life I wouldn't be ashamed of and
    disgusted with.  What were your major influences in your upbringing and
    education would you credit for influencing your belief system?

    I don't know. I guess the ideas of free software were formulated from the
    community around me at MIT, because we practiced free software, and they
    were doing that before I joined them.

    What was different for me was that whereas the others liked doing free
    software, but they were willing to do nonfree software when that was
    somehow more convenient or satisfied other goals such as to make the
    software successful or whatever.

    For me that was the thing that made it good rather than bad, and it was
    useless to throw that away. But it took years for me to formulate those
    ideas, something like ten years. In the mid-70's, even late 70's, I still
    hadn't reached the conclusion that nonfree software was simply unjust.
    You've described yourself as a pessimist so I won't ask you to look into
    your crystal ball…

    I wouldn't see anything, anyway. The future depends on you. If I could tell
    you what's going to happen then it would be futile for you to try to change
    it.  So, what software projects or social movements are you excited to see
    emerging?

    At the moment there isn't an existing software project that's making me
    excited, but I'm trying to convince someone to work on a particular, rather
    specialized piece of free software that is the last thing we need in order
    to make the use of ATI video accelerators possible in the Free World.

    As for social movements, I'm very excited by the Occupy movement, by the
    opposition to austerity in Greece and Spain, and the movements against
    corporate tax-evasion, and basically I'm excited to see more people
    fighting against the domination of society by the rich few.

Introduction

Projects with the goal of digital inclusion are making a big assumption. They
are assuming that participating in a digital society is good, but that's not
necessarily true. Being in a digital society can be good or bad, depending on
whether that digital society is just or unjust. There are many ways in which
our freedom is being attacked by digital technology. Digital technology can
make things worse, and it will, unless we fight to prevent it.

Therefore, if we have an unjust digital society, we should cancel these
projects for digital inclusion and launch projects for digital extraction. We
have to extract people from digital society if it doesn't respect their
freedom, or we have to make it respect their freedom.  Surveillance

What are the threats? First, surveillance. Computers are Stalin's dream: they
are ideal tools for surveillance, because anything we do with computers, the
computers can record. They can record the information in a perfectly indexed
searchable form in a central database, ideal for any tyrant who wants to crush
opposition.

Surveillance is sometimes done with our own computers. For instance, if you
have a computer that's running Microsoft Windows, that system is doing
surveillance. There are features in Windows that send data to some server, data
about the use of the computer. A surveillance feature was discovered in the
iPhone a few months ago, and people started calling it the “spy-phone.” Flash
player has a surveillance feature too, and so does the Amazon “Swindle.” They
call it the Kindle, but I call it “the Swindle,” l'escroc, because it's meant
to swindle users out of their freedom. It makes people identify themselves
whenever they buy a book, and that means Amazon has a giant list of all the
books each user has read. Such a list must not exist anywhere.

Most portable phones will transmit their location, computed using GPS, on
remote command. The phone company is accumulating a giant list of places that
the user has been. A German MP in the Green Party [correction: Malte Spitz is
on the staff of the Green Party, not an elected official] asked the phone
company to give him the data it had about where he was. He had to sue, he had
to go to court to get this information. And when he got it, he received
forty-four thousand location points for a period of six months! That's more
than two hundred per day! What that means is someone could form a very good
picture of his activities just by looking at that data.

We can stop our own computers from doing surveillance on us if we have control
of the software that they run. But the software these people are running, they
don't have control over. It's nonfree software, and that's why it has malicious
features such as surveillance. However, the surveillance is not always done
with our own computers, it's also done at one remove. For instance ISPs in
Europe are required to keep data about the user's Internet communications for a
long time, in case the State decides to investigate that person later for
whatever imaginable reason.

With a portable phone… even if you can stop the phone from transmitting your
GPS location, the system can determine the phone's location approximately, by
comparing the time when the signals arrive at different towers. So the phone
system can do surveillance even without special cooperation from the phone
itself.

Likewise, the bicycles that people rent in Paris. Of course the system knows
where you get the bicycle and it knows where you return the bicycle, and I've
heard reports that it tracks the bicycles as they are moving around as well. So
they are not something we can really trust.

But there are also systems that have nothing to do with us that exist only for
tracking. For instance, in the UK all car travel is monitored. Every car's
movements are being recorded in real time and can be tracked by the State in
real time. This is done with cameras on the side of the road.

Now, the only way we can prevent surveillance that's done at one remove or by
unrelated systems is through political action against increased government
power to track and monitor everyone, which means of course we have to reject
whatever excuse they come up with. For doing such systems, no excuse is
valid—to monitor everyone.

In a free society, when you go out in public, you are not guaranteed anonymity.
It's possible for someone to recognize you and remember. And later that person
could say that he saw you at a certain place. But that information is diffuse.
It's not conveniently assembled to track everybody and investigate what they
did. To collect that information is a lot of work, so it's only done in special
cases when it's necessary.

But computerized surveillance makes it possible to centralize and index all
this information so that an unjust regime can find it all, and find out all
about everyone. If a dictator takes power, which could happen anywhere, people
realize this and they recognize that they should not communicate with other
dissidents in a way that the State could find out about. But if the dictator
has several years of stored records of who talks with whom, it's too late to
take any precautions then, because he already has everything he needs to
realize: “OK, this guy is a dissident, and he spoke with him. Maybe he is a
dissident too. Maybe we should grab him and torture him.”

So we need to campaign to put an end to digital surveillance now. You can't
wait until there is a dictator and it would really matter. And besides, it
doesn't take an outright dictatorship to start attacking human rights.

I wouldn't quite call the government of the UK a dictatorship. It's not very
democratic, and one way it crushes democracy is using surveillance. A few years
ago, people believed to be on their way to a protest, they were going to
protest, they were arrested before they could get there because their car was
tracked through this universal car tracking system.  Censorship

The second threat is censorship. Censorship is not new, it existed long before
computers. But 15 years ago, we thought that the Internet would protect us from
censorship, that it would defeat censorship. Then, China and some other obvious
tyrannies went to great lengths to impose censorship on the Internet, and we
said: “Well that's not surprising, what else would governments like that do?”

But today we see censorship imposed in countries that are not normally thought
of as dictatorships, such as for instance the UK, France, Spain, Italy,
Denmark…

They all have systems of blocking access to some websites. Denmark established
a system that blocks access to a long list of web pages, which was secret. The
citizens were not supposed to know how the government was censoring them, but
the list was leaked and posted on WikiLeaks. At that point, Denmark added the
WikiLeaks page to its censorship list. So, the whole rest of the world can find
out how Danes are being censored, but Danes are not supposed to know.

A few months ago, Turkey, which claims to respect some human rights, announced
that every Internet user would have to choose between censorship and more
censorship. Four different levels of censorship they get to choose! But freedom
is not one of the options.

Australia wanted to impose filtering on the Internet, but that was blocked.
However Australia has a different kind of censorship: it has censorship of
links. That is, if a website in Australia has a link to some censored site
outside Australia, the one in Australia can be punished. Electronic Frontiers
Australia, that is an organization that defends human rights in the digital
domain in Australia, posted a link to a foreign political website. It was
ordered to delete the link or face a penalty of $11,000 a day. So they deleted
it, what else could they do? This is a very harsh system of censorship.

In Spain, the censorship that was adopted earlier this year allows officials to
arbitrarily shut down an Internet site in Spain, or impose filtering to block
access to a site outside of Spain. And they can do this without any kind of
trial. This was one of the motivations for the Indignados, who have been
protesting in the street.

There were protests in the street in Turkey as well, after that announcement,
but the government refused to change its policy.

We must recognize that a country that imposes censorship on the Internet is not
a free country. And is not a legitimate government either.  Restricted data
formats

The next threat to our freedom comes from data formats that restrict users.

Sometimes it's because the format is secret. There are many application
programs that save the user's data in a secret format, which is meant to
prevent the user from taking that data and using it with some other program.
The goal is to prevent interoperability.

Now, evidently, if a program implements a secret format, that's because the
program is not free software. So this is another kind of malicious feature.
Surveillance is one kind of malicious feature that you find in some nonfree
programs; using secret formats to restrict the users is another kind of
malicious feature that you also find in some nonfree programs.

But if you have a free program that handles a certain format, ipso facto that
format is not secret. This kind of malicious feature can only exist in a
nonfree program. Surveillance features, well, theoretically they could exist in
a free program but you don't find them happening. Because the users would fix
it, you see. The users wouldn't like this, so they would fix it.

In any case, we also find secret data formats in use for publication of works.
You find secret data formats in use for audio, such as music, for video, for
books… And these secret formats are known as Digital Restrictions Management,
or DRM, or digital handcuffs (les menottes numériques).

So, the works are published in secret formats so that only proprietary programs
can play them, so that these proprietary programs can have the malicious
feature of restricting the users, stopping them from doing something that would
be natural to do.

And this is used even by public entities to communicate with the people. For
instance Italian public television makes its programs available on the net in a
format called VC-1, which is a standard supposedly, but it's a secret standard.
Now I can't imagine how any publicly supported entity could justify using a
secret format to communicate with the public. This should be illegal. In fact I
think all use of Digital Restrictions Management should be illegal. No company
should be allowed to do this.

There are also formats that are not secret but almost might as well be secret,
for instance Flash. Flash is not actually secret but Adobe keeps making new
versions, which are different, faster than anyone can keep up and make free
software to play those files; so it has almost the same effect as being secret.

Then there are the patented formats, such as MP3 for audio. It's bad to
distribute audio in MP3 format. There is free software to handle MP3 format, to
play it and to generate it, but because it's patented in many countries, many
distributors of free software don't dare include those programs; so if they
distribute the GNU+Linux system, their system doesn't include a player for MP3.
As a result if anyone distributes some music in MP3, that's putting pressure on
people not to use GNU/Linux. Sure, if you're an expert you can find a free
software and install it, but there are lots of non experts, and they might see
that they installed a version of GNU/Linux which doesn't have that software,
and it won't play MP3 files, and they think it's the system's fault. They don't
realize it's MP3's fault. But this is the fact.

Therefore, if you want to support freedom, don't distribute MP3 files. That's
why I say if you're recording my speech and you want to distribute copies,
don't do it in a patented format such as MPEG-2, or MPEG-4, or MP3. Use a
format friendly to free software, such as the OGG formats or WebM. And by the
way, if you are going to distribute copies of the recording, please put on it
the Creative Commons, No Derivatives license. This is a statement of my
personal views. If it were a lecture for a course, if it were didactic, then it
ought to be free, but statements of opinion are different.  Software that isn't
free

Now this leads me to the next threat which comes from software that the users
don't have control over. In other words, software that isn't free, that is not
libre. In this particular point French is clearer than English. The English
word “free” means libre and gratuit, but what I mean when I say “free software”
is logiciel libre. I don't mean gratuit. I'm not talking about price. Price is
a side issue, just a detail, because it doesn't matter ethically. You know, if
I have a copy of a program and I sell it to you for one euro or a hundred
euros, who cares? Right? Why should anyone think that's good or bad? Or suppose
I gave it to you gratuitement… Still, who cares? But whether this program
respects your freedom, that's important!

So free software is software that respects users' freedom. What does this mean?
Ultimately there are just two possibilities with software: either the users
control the program or the program controls the users. If the users have
certain essential freedoms, then they control the program, and those freedoms
are the criterion for free software. But if the users don't fully have the
essential freedoms, then the program controls the users. But somebody controls
that program and, through it, has power over the users.

So, a nonfree program is an instrument to give somebody power over a lot of
other people, and this is unjust power that nobody should ever have. This is
why nonfree software (les logiciels privateurs, qui privent de la liberté), why
proprietary software is an injustice and should not exist; because it leaves
the users without freedom.

Now, the developer who has control of the program often feels tempted to
introduce malicious features to further exploit or abuse those users. He feels
a temptation because he knows he can get away with it. Because his program
controls the users and the users do not have control of the program, if he puts
in a malicious feature, the users can't fix it; they can't remove the malicious
feature.

I've already told you about two kinds of malicious features: surveillance
features, such as are found in Windows and the iPhone and Flash player and the
Swindle, sort of. And there are also features to restrict users, which work
with secret data formats, and those are found in Windows, Macintosh, the
iPhone, Flash player, the Amazon Swindle, the Playstation 3 and lots and lots
of other programs.

The other kind of malicious feature is the backdoor. That means something in
that program is listening for remote commands and obeying them, and those
commands can mistreat the user. We know of backdoors in Windows, in the iPhone,
in the Amazon Swindle. The Amazon Swindle has a backdoor that can delete books,
remotely delete books. We know this by observation, because Amazon did it: in
2009 Amazon remotely deleted thousands of copies of a particular book. Those
were authorized copies, people had obtained them directly from Amazon, and thus
Amazon knew exactly where they were, which is how Amazon knew where to send the
commands to delete those books. You know which book Amazon deleted? 1984 by
George Orwell. [laughter] It's a book everyone should read, because it
discusses a totalitarian state that did things like delete books it didn't
like. Everybody should read it, but not on the Amazon Swindle. [laughter]

Anyway, malicious features are present in the most widely used nonfree
programs, but they are rare in free software, because with free software the
users have control. They can read the source code and they can change it. So,
if there were a malicious feature, somebody would sooner or later spot it and
fix it. This means that somebody who is considering introducing a malicious
feature does not find it so tempting, because he knows he might get away with
it for a while but somebody will spot it, will fix it, and everybody will loose
trust in the perpetrator. It's not so tempting when you know you're going to
fail. And that's why we find that malicious features are rare in free software,
and common in proprietary software.  The four freedoms of free software

The essential freedoms are four:

    Freedom 0 is the freedom to run the program as you wish.  Freedom 1 is the
    freedom to study the source code and change it, so the program does your
    computing the way you wish.  Freedom 2 is the freedom to help others.
    That's the freedom to make exact copies and redistribute them when you
    wish.  Freedom 3 is the freedom to contribute to your community. That's the
    freedom to make copies of your modified versions, if you have made any, and
    then distribute them to others when you wish.

These freedoms, in order to be adequate, must apply to all activities of life.
For instance if it says “this is free for academic use,” it's not free. Because
that's too limited. It doesn't apply to all areas of life. In particular, if a
program is free, that means it can be modified and distributed commercially,
because commerce is an area of life, an activity in life. And this freedom has
to apply to all activities.

However, it's not obligatory to do any of these things. The point is you're
free to do them if you wish, when you wish. But you never have to do them. You
don't have to do any of them. You don't have to run the program. You don't have
to study or change the source code. You don't have to make any copies. You
don't have to distribute your modified versions. The point is you should be
free to do those things if you wish.

Now, freedom number 1, the freedom to study and change the source code to make
the program do your computing as you wish, includes something that might not be
obvious at first. If the program comes in a product, and the developer can
provide an upgrade that will run, then you have to be able to make your version
run in that product. If the product will only run the developer's versions, and
refuses to run yours, the executable in that product is not free software. Even
if it was compiled from free source code, it's not free because you don't have
the freedom to make the program do your computing the way you wish. So, freedom
1 has to be real, not just theoretical. It has to include the freedom to use
your version, not just the freedom to make some source code that won't run.
The GNU Project and the Free Software movement

I launched the Free Software movement in 1983, when I announced the plan to
develop a free software operating system whose name is GNU. Now GNU, the name
GNU, is a joke; because part of the hacker's spirit is to have fun even when
you're doing something very serious. Now I can't think of anything more
seriously important than defending freedom.

But that didn't mean I couldn't give my system a name that's a joke. So GNU is
a joke because it's a recursive acronym, it stands for “GNU's Not Unix,” so
G.N.U.: GNU's Not Unix. So the G in GNU stands for GNU.

In fact this was a tradition at the time. The tradition was: if there was an
existing program and you wrote something similar to it, inspired by it, you
could give credit by giving your program a name that's a recursive acronym
saying it's not the other one. So I gave credit to Unix for the technical ideas
of Unix, but with the name GNU, because I decided to make GNU a Unix-like
system, with the same commands, the same system calls, so that it would be
compatible, so that people who used Unix could switch over easily.

But the reason for developing GNU, that was unique. GNU is the only operating
system, as far as I know, ever developed for the purpose of freedom. Not for
technical motivations, not for commercial motivations. GNU was written for your
freedom. Because without a free operating system, it's impossible to have
freedom and use a computer. And there were none, and I wanted people to have
freedom, so it was up to me to write one.

Nowadays there are millions of users of the GNU operating system and most of
them don't know they are using the GNU operating system, because there is a
widespread practice which is not nice. People call the system “Linux.” Many do,
but some people don't, and I hope you'll be one of them. Please, since we
started this, since we wrote the biggest piece of the code, please give us
equal mention, please call the system “GNU+Linux,” or “GNU/Linux.” It's not
much to ask.

But there is another reason to do this. It turns out that the person who wrote
Linux, which is one component of the system as we use it today, he doesn't
agree with the Free Software movement. And so if you call the whole system
Linux, in effect you're steering people towards his ideas, and away from our
ideas. Because he's not gonna say to them that they deserve freedom. He's going
to say to them that he likes convenient, reliable, powerful software. He's
going to tell people that those are the important values.

But if you tell them the system is GNU+Linux—it's the GNU operating system plus
Linux the kernel—then they'll know about us, and then they might listen to what
we say: you deserve freedom. And since freedom will be lost if we don't defend
it—there's always going to be a Sarkozy to take it away—we need above all to
teach people to demand freedom, to be ready to stand up for their freedom the
next time someone threatens to take it away.

Nowadays, you can tell who doesn't want to discuss these ideas of freedom
because they don't say logiciel libre. They don't say libre, they say “open
source.” That term was coined by the people like Mr Torvalds who would prefer
that these ethical issues don't get raised. And so the way you can help us
raise them is by saying libre. You know, it's up to you where you stand, you're
free to say what you think. If you agree with them, you can say open source. If
you agree with us, show it, say libre!  Free software and education

The most important point about free software is that schools must teach
exclusively free software. All levels of schools from kindergarten to
university, it's their moral responsibility to teach only free software in
their education, and all other educational activities as well, including those
that say that they're spreading digital literacy. A lot of those activities
teach Windows, which means they're teaching dependence. To teach people the use
of proprietary software is to teach dependence, and educational activities must
never do that because it's the opposite of their mission. Educational
activities have a social mission to educate good citizens of a strong, capable,
cooperating, independent and free society. And in the area of computing, that
means: teach free software; never teach a proprietary program because that's
inculcating dependence.

Why do you think some proprietary developers offer gratis copies to schools?
They want the schools to make the children dependent. And then, when they
graduate, they're still dependent and, you know, the company is not going to
offer them gratis copies. And some of them get jobs and go to work for
companies. Not many of them anymore, but some of them. And those companies are
not going to be offered gratis copies. Oh no! The idea is: if the school
directs the students down the path of permanent dependence, they can drag the
rest of society with them into dependence. That's the plan! It's just like
giving the school gratis needles full of addicting drugs, saying: “Inject this
into your students, the first dose is gratis. Once you're dependent, then you
have to pay.” Well, the school would reject the drugs because it isn't right to
teach the students to use addictive drugs, and it's got to reject the
proprietary software also.

Some people say: “Let's have the school teach both proprietary software and
free software, so the students become familiar with both.” That's like saying:
“For the lunch let's give the kids spinach and tobacco, so that they become
accustomed to both.” No! The schools are only supposed to teach good habits,
not bad ones! So there should be no Windows in a school, no Macintosh, nothing
proprietary in the education.

But also, for the sake of educating the programmers. You see, some people have
a talent for programming. At ten to thirteen years old, typically, they're
fascinated, and if they use a program, they want to know: “How does it do
this?” But when they ask the teacher, if it's proprietary, the teacher has to
say: “I'm sorry, it's a secret, we can't find out.” Which means education is
forbidden. A proprietary program is the enemy of the spirit of education. It's
knowledge withheld, so it should not be tolerated in a school, even though
there may be plenty of people in the school who don't care about programming,
don't want to learn this. Still, because it's the enemy of the spirit of
education, it shouldn't be there in the school.

But if the program is free, the teacher can explain what he knows, and then
give out copies of the source code, saying: “Read it and you'll understand
everything.” And those who are really fascinated, they will read it! And this
gives them an opportunity to start to learn how to be good programmers.

To learn to be a good programmer, you'll need to recognize that certain ways of
writing code, even if they make sense to you and they are correct, they're not
good because other people will have trouble understanding them. Good code is
clear code that others will have an easy time working on when they need to make
further changes.

How do you learn to write good clear code? You do it by reading lots of code,
and writing lots of code. Well, only free software offers the chance to read
the code of large programs that we really use. And then you have to write lots
of code, which means you have to write changes in large programs.

How do you learn to write good code for the large programs? You have to start
small, which does not mean small program, oh no! The challenges of the code for
large programs don't even begin to appear in small programs. So the way you
start small at writing code for large programs is by writing small changes in
large programs. And only free software gives you the chance to do that.

So, if a school wants to offer the possibility of learning to be a good
programmer, it needs to be a free software school.

But there is an even deeper reason, and that is for the sake of moral
education, education in citizenship. It's not enough for a school to teach
facts and skills, it has to teach the spirit of goodwill, the habit of helping
others. Therefore, every class should have this rule: “Students, if you bring
software to class, you may not keep it for yourself, you must share copies with
the rest of the class, including the source code in case anyone here wants to
learn. Because this class is a place where we share our knowledge. Therefore,
bringing a proprietary program to class is not permitted.” The school must
follow its own rule to set a good example. Therefore, the school must bring
only free software to class, and share copies, including the source code, with
anyone in the class that wants copies.

Those of you who have a connection with a school, it's your duty to campaign
and pressure that school to move to free software. And you have to be firm. It
may take years, but you can succeed as long as you never give up. Keep seeking
more allies among the students, the faculty, the staff, the parents, anyone!
And always bring it up as an ethical issue. If someone else wants to sidetrack
the discussion into this practical advantage and this practical disadvantage,
which means they're ignoring the most important question, then you have to say:
“This is not about how to do the best job of educating, this is about how to do
a good education instead of an evil one. It's how to do education right instead
of wrong, not just how to make it a little more effective, or less.” So don't
get distracted with those secondary issues, and ignore what really matters!
Internet services

So, moving on to the next menace. There are two issues that arise from the use
of Internet services. One of them is that the server could abuse your data, and
another is that it could take control of your computing.

The first issue, people already know about. They are aware that, if you upload
data to an Internet service, there is a question of what it will do with that
data. It might do things that mistreat you. What could it do? It could lose the
data, it could change the data, it could refuse to let you get the data back.
And it could also show the data to someone else you don't want to show it to.
Four different possible things.

Now, here, I'm talking about the data that you knowingly gave to that site. Of
course, many of those services do surveillance as well.

For instance, consider Facebook. Users send lots of data to Facebook, and one
of the bad things about Facebook is that it shows a lot of that data to lots of
other people, and even if it offers them a setting to say “no,” that may not
really work. After all, if you say “some other people can see this piece of
information,” one of them might publish it. Now, that's not Facebook's fault,
there is nothing they could do to prevent that, but it ought to warn people.
Instead of saying “mark this as only to your so-called friends,” it should say
“keep in mind that your so-called friends are not really your friends, and if
they want to make trouble for you, they could publish this.” Every time, it
should say that, if they want to deal with people ethically.

As well as all the data users of Facebook voluntarily give to Facebook,
Facebook is collecting data about people's activities on the net through
various methods of surveillance. But that's the first menace. For now I am
talking about the data that people know they are giving to these sites.

Now, losing data is something that could always happen by accident. That
possibility is always there, no matter how careful someone is. Therefore, you
need to keep multiple copies of data that matters. If you do that, then, even
if someone decided to delete your data intentionally, it wouldn't hurt you that
much, because you'd have other copies of it.

So, as long as you are maintaining multiple copies, you don't have to worry too
much about someone's losing your data. What about whether you can get it back.
Well, some services make it possible to get back all the data that you sent,
and some don't. Google services will let the user get back the data the user
has put into them. Facebook, famously, does not.

Of course in the case of Google, this only applies to the data the user knows
Google has. Google does lots of surveillance, too, and that data is not
included. But in any case, if you can get the data back, then you could track
whether they have altered it. And they're not very likely to start altering
people's data if the people can tell. So maybe we can keep a track on that
particular kind of abuse.

But the abuse of showing the data to someone you don't want it to be shown to
is very common and almost impossible for you to prevent, especially if it's a
US company. You see, the most hypocritically named law in US history, the
so-called USA Patriot Act, says that Big Brother's police can collect just
about all the data that companies maintain about individuals. Not just
companies, but other organizations too, like public libraries. The police can
get this massively, without even going to court. Now, in a country that was
founded on an idea of freedom, there's nothing more unpatriotic than this. But
this is what they did. So you mustn't ever trust any of your data to a US
company. And they say that foreign subsidiaries of US companies are subject to
this as well. So the company you're directly dealing with may be in Europe, but
if it's owned by a US company, you've got the same problem to deal with.

However, this is mainly of concern when the data you're sending to the service
is not for publication. There are some services where you publish things. Of
course, if you publish something, you know everybody is gonna be able to see
it. So, there is no way they can hurt you by showing it to somebody who wasn't
supposed to see it. There is nobody who wasn't supposed to see it, if you
published it. So in that case the problem doesn't exist.

So these are four sub-issues of this one threat of abusing our data. The idea
of the Freedom Box project is you have your own server in your own home, and
when you want to do something remotely, you do it with your own server, and the
police have to get a court order in order to search your server. So you have
the same rights this way that you would have traditionally in the physical
world.

The point here and in so many other issues is: as we start doing things
digitally instead of physically, we shouldn't lose any of our rights; because
the general tendency is that we do lose rights.

Basically, Stallman's law says that, in an epoch when governments work for the
mega-corporations instead of reporting to their citizens, every technological
change can be taken advantage of to reduce our freedom. Because reducing our
freedom is what these governments want to do. So the question is: when do they
get an opportunity? Well, any change that happens for some other reason is a
possible opportunity, and they will take advantage of it if that's their
general desire.

But the other issue with Internet services is that they can take control of
your computing, and that's not so commonly known. But it's becoming more
common. There are services that offer to do computing for you on data supplied
by you—things that you should do in your own computer but they invite you to
let somebody else's computer do that computing work for you. And the result is
you lose control over it. It's just as if you used a nonfree program.

Two different scenarios, but they lead to the same problem. If you do your
computing with a nonfree program… well, the users don't control the nonfree
program, it controls the users, which would include you. So you've lost control
of the computing that's being done. But if you do your computing in his server…
well, the programs that are doing it are the ones he chose. You can't touch
them or see them, so you have no control over them. He has control over them,
maybe.

If they are free software and he installs them, then he has control over them.
But even he might not have control. He might be running a proprietary program
in his server, in which case it's somebody else who has control of the
computing being done in his server. He doesn't control it and you don't.

But suppose he installs a free program, then he has control over the computing
being done in his computer, but you don't. So, either way, you don't! So the
only way to have control over your computing is to do it with your copy of a
free program.

This practice is called “Software as a Service.” It means doing your computing
with your data in somebody else's server. And I don't know of anything that can
make this acceptable. It's always something that takes away your freedom, and
the only solution I know of is to refuse. For instance, there are servers that
will do translation or voice recognition, and you are letting them have control
over this computing activity, which we shouldn't ever do.

Of course, we are also giving them data about ourselves which they shouldn't
have. Imagine if you had a conversation with somebody through a
voice-recognition translation system that was Software as as Service and it's
really running on a server belonging to some company. Well, that company also
gets to know what was said in the conversation, and if it's a US company that
means Big Brother also gets to know. This is no good.  Computers for voting

The next threat to our freedom in a digital society is using computers for
voting. You can't trust computers for voting. Whoever controls the software in
those computers has the power to commit undetectable fraud.

Elections are special, because there's nobody involved that we dare trust
fully. Everybody has to be checked, crosschecked by others, so that nobody is
in a position to falsify the results by himself. Because if anybody is in a
position to do that, he might do it. So our traditional systems for voting were
designed so that nobody was fully trusted, everybody was being checked by
others. So that nobody could easily commit fraud. But once you introduce a
program, this is impossible.

How can you tell if a voting machine will honestly count the votes? You'd have
to study the program that's running in it during the election, which of course
nobody can do, and most people wouldn't even know how to do. But even the
experts who might theoretically be capable of studying the program, they can't
do it while people are voting. They'd have to do it in advance, and then how do
they know that the program they studied is the one that's running while people
vote? Maybe it's been changed.

Now, if this program is proprietary, that means some company controls it. The
election authority can't even tell what that program is doing. Well, this
company then could rig the election. And there are accusations that this was
done in the US within the past ten years, that election results were falsified
this way.

But what if the program is free software? That means the election authority who
owns this voting machine has control over the software in it, so the election
authority could rig the election. You can't trust them either. You don't dare
trust anybody in voting, and the reason is, there's no way that the voters can
verify for themselves that their votes were correctly counted, nor that false
votes were not added.

In other activities of life, you can usually tell if somebody is trying to
cheat you. Consider for instance buying something from a store. You order
something, maybe you give a credit card number. If the product doesn't come,
you can complain and you can… of course if you've got a good enough memory
you'll notice if that product doesn't come. You're not just giving total blind
trust to the store, because you can check. But in elections you can't check.

I saw once a paper where someone described a theoretical system for voting
which used some sophisticated mathematics so that people could check that their
votes had been counted, even though everybody's vote was secret, and they could
also verify that false votes hadn't been added. It was very exciting, powerful
mathematics; but even if that mathematics is correct, that doesn't mean the
system would be acceptable to use in practice, because the vulnerabilities of a
real system might be outside of that mathematics. For instance, suppose you're
voting over the Internet and suppose you're using a machine that's a zombie. It
might tell you that the vote was sent for A while actually sending a vote for
B. Who knows whether you'd ever find out? So, in practice the only way to see
if these systems work and are honest is through years, in fact decades, of
trying them and checking in other ways what happened.

I wouldn't want my country to be the pioneer in this. So, use paper for voting.
Make sure there are ballots that can be recounted.  Speaker's note, added
subsequently

Remote voting by internet has an inherent social danger, that your boss might
tell you, “I want you to vote for candidate C, and do it from the computer in
my office while I watch you.” He does not need to say out loud that you might
be fired if you do not comply. This danger is not based on a technical flaw, so
it can't be fixed by fixing the technology.  The war on sharing

The next threat to our freedom in a digital society comes from the war on
sharing.

One of the tremendous benefits of digital technology is that it is easy to copy
published works and share these copies with others. Sharing is good, and with
digital technology, sharing is easy. So, millions of people share. Those who
profit by having power over the distribution of these works don't want us to
share. And since they are businesses, governments which have betrayed their
people and work for the Empire of mega-corporations try to serve those
businesses, they are against their own people, they are for the businesses, for
the publishers.

Well, that's not good. And with the help of these governments, the companies
have been waging war on sharing, and they've proposed a series of cruel
draconian measures. Why do they propose cruel draconian measures? Because
nothing less has a chance of success: when something is good and easy, people
do it, and the only way to stop them is by being very nasty. So of course, what
they propose is nasty, nasty, and the next one is nastier. So they tried suing
teenagers for hundreds of thousands of dollars. That was pretty nasty. And they
tried turning our technology against us, Digital Restrictions Management that
means, digital handcuffs.

But among the people there were clever programmers too and they found ways to
break the handcuffs. So for instance, DVDs were designed to have encrypted
movies in a secret encryption format, and the idea was that all the programs to
decrypt the video would be proprietary with digital handcuffs. They would all
be designed to restrict the users. And their scheme worked OK for a while. But
some people in Europe figured out the encryption and they released a free
program that could actually play the video on a DVD.

Well, the movie companies didn't leave it there. They went to the US congress
and bought a law making that software illegal. The United States invented
censorship of software in 1998, with the Digital Millennium Copyright Act
(DMCA). So the distribution of that free program was forbidden in the United
States. Unfortunately it didn't stop with the United States. The European Union
adopted a directive, in 2003 I believe, requiring such laws. The directive only
says that commercial distribution has to be banned, but just about every
country in the European Union has adopted a nastier law. In France, the mere
possession of a copy of that program is an offense punished by imprisonment,
thanks to Sarkozy. I believe that was done by the law DADVSI. I guess he hoped
that with an unpronounceable name, people wouldn't be able to criticize it.
[laughter]

So, elections are coming. Ask the candidates in the parties: will you repeal
the DADVSI? And if not, don't support them. You mustn't give up lost moral
territory forever. You've got to fight to win it back.

So, we still are fighting against digital handcuffs. The Amazon Swindle has
digital handcuffs to take away the traditional freedoms of readers to do things
such as: give a book to someone else, or lend a book to someone else. That's a
vitally important social act. That is what builds society among people who
read, lending books. Amazon doesn't want to let people lend books freely. And
then there is also selling a book, perhaps to a used bookstore. You can't do
that either.

It looked for a while as if DRM had disappeared on music, but now they're
bringing it back with streaming services such as Spotify. These services all
require proprietary client software, and the reason is so they can put digital
handcuffs on the users. So, reject them! They already showed quite openly that
you can't trust them, because first they said: “You can listen as much as you
like.” And then they said: “Oh, no! You can only listen a certain number of
hours a month.” The issue is not whether that particular change was good or
bad, just or unjust; the point is, they have the power to impose any change in
policies. So don't let them have that power. You should have your own copy of
any music you want to listen to.

And then came the next assault on our freedom: HADOPI, basically punishment on
accusation. It was started in France but it's been exported to many other
countries. The United States now demand such unjust policies in its free
exploitation treaties. A few months ago, Colombia adopted such a law under
orders from its masters in Washington. Of course, the ones in Washington are
not the real masters, they're just the ones who control the United States on
behalf of the Empire. But they're the ones who also dictate to Colombia on
behalf of the Empire.

In France, since the Constitutional Council objected to explicitly giving
people punishment without trial, they invented a kind of trial which is not a
real trial, it's just a form of a trial, so they can pretend that people have a
trial before they're punished. But in other countries they don't bother with
that, it's explicit punishment on accusation only. Which means that for the
sake of their war on sharing, they're prepared to abolish the basic principles
of justice. It shows how thoroughly anti-freedom anti-justice they are. These
are not legitimate governments.

And I'm sure they'll come up with more nasty ideas because they're paid to
defeat the people no matter what it takes. Now, when they do this, they always
say that it's for the sake of the artists, that they have “protect” the
“creators.” Now those are both propaganda terms. I am convinced that the reason
they love the word “creators” is because it is a comparison with a deity. They
want us to think of artists as super-human, and thus deserving special
privileges and power over us, which is something I disagree with.

In fact though, the only artists that benefit very much from this system are
the big stars. The other artists are getting crushed into the ground by the
heels of these same companies. But they treat the stars very well, because the
stars have a lot of clout. If a star threatens to move to another company, the
company says: “Oh, we'll give you what you want.” But for any other artist they
say: “You don't matter, we can treat you any way we like.”

So the superstars have been corrupted by the millions of dollars or euros that
they get, to the point where they'll do almost anything for more money. For
instance, J. K. Rowling is a good example. J. K. Rowling, a few years ago, went
to court in Canada and obtained an order that people who had bought her books
must not read them. She got an order telling people not to read her books!

Here's what happened. A bookstore put the books on display for sale too early,
before the date they were supposed to go on sale. And people came into the
store and said: “Oh, I want that!” And they bought it and took away their
copies. And then, they discovered the mistake, so they took the copies off of
display. But Rowling wanted to crush any circulation of any information from
those books, so she went to court, and the court ordered those people not to
read the books that they now owned.

In response, I call for a total boycott of Harry Potter. But I don't say you
shouldn't read those books or watch the movies, I only say you shouldn't buy
the books or pay for the movies. [laughter] I leave it to Rowling to tell
people not to read the books. As far as I am concerned, if you borrow the book
and read it, that's OK. [laughter] Just don't give her any money! But this
happened with paper books. The court could make this order but it couldn't get
the books back from the people who had bought them. Imagine if they were
ebooks. Imagine if they were ebooks on the Swindle. Amazon could send commands
to erase them.

So, I don't have much respect for stars who will go to such lengths for more
money. But most artists aren't like that, they never got enough money to be
corrupted. Because the current system of copyright supports most artists very
badly. And so, when these companies demand to expand the war on sharing,
supposedly for the sake of the artists, I'm against what they want but I would
like to support the artists better. I appreciate their work and I realize if we
want them to do more work we should support them.  Supporting the arts

I have two proposals for how to support artists, methods that are compatible
with sharing, that would allow us to end the war on sharing and still support
artists.

One method uses tax money. We get a certain amount of public funds to
distribute among artists. But, how much should each artist get? Well, we have
to measure popularity. You see, the current system supposedly supports artists
based on their popularity. So I'm saying: let's keep that, let's continue in
this system to support them based on their popularity. We can measure the
popularity of all the artists with some kind of polling or sampling, so that we
don't have to do surveillance. We can respect people's anonymity.

OK, we get a raw popularity figure for each artist, how do we convert that into
an amount of money? Well, the obvious way is: distribute the money in
proportion to popularity. So if A is a thousand times as popular as B, A will
get a thousand times as much money as B. That's not efficient distribution of
the money. It's not putting the money to good use. You see, it's easy for a
star A to be a thousand times as popular as a fairly successful artist B. And
if we use linear proportion, we'll give A a thousand times as much money as we
give B. And that means that, either we have to make A tremendously rich, or we
are not supporting B enough.

Well, the money we use to make A tremendously rich is failing to do an
effective job of supporting the arts; so, it's inefficient. Therefore I say:
let's use the cube root. Cube root looks sort of like this. The point is: if A
is a thousand times as popular as B, with the cube root A will get ten times as
much as B, not a thousand times as much, just ten times as much. So the use of
the cube root shifts a lot of the money from the stars to the artists of
moderate popularity. And that means, with less money we can adequately support
a much larger number of artists.

There are two reasons why this system would use less money than we pay now.
First of all because it would be supporting artists but not companies, second
because it would shift the money from the stars to the artists of moderate
popularity. Now, it would remain the case that the more popular you are, the
more money you get. And so the star A would still get more than B, but not
astronomically more.

That's one method, and because it won't be so much money it doesn't matter so
much how we get the money. It could be from a special tax on Internet
connectivity, it could just be some of the general budget that gets allocated
to this purpose. We won't care because it won't be so much money, much less
than we're paying now.

The other method I've proposed is voluntary payments. Suppose each player had a
button you could use to send one euro. A lot of people would send it; after all
it's not that much money. I think a lot of you might push that button every
day, to give one euro to some artist who had made a work that you liked. But
nothing would demand this, you wouldn't be required or ordered or pressured to
send the money; you would do it because you felt like it. But there are some
people who wouldn't do it because they're poor and they can't afford to give
one euro. And it's good that they won't give it, we don't have to squeeze money
out of poor people to support the artists. There are enough non-poor people
who'll be happy to do it. Why wouldn't you give one euro to some artists today,
if you appreciated their work? It's too inconvenient to give it to them. So my
proposal is to remove the inconvenience. If the only reason not to give that
euro is you would have one euro less, you would do it fairly often.

So these are my two proposals for how to support artists, while encouraging
sharing because sharing is good. Let's put an end to the war on sharing, laws
like DADVSI and HADOPI, it's not just the methods that they propose that are
evil, their purpose is evil. That's why they propose cruel and draconian
measures. They're trying to do something that's nasty by nature. So let's
support artists in other ways.  Rights in cyberspace

The last threat to our freedom in digital society is the fact that we don't
have a firm right to do the things we do, in cyberspace. In the physical world,
if you have certain views and you want to give people copies of a text that
defends those views, you're free to do so. You could even buy a printer to
print them, and you're free to hand them out on the street, or you're free to
rent a store and hand them out there. If you want to collect money to support
your cause, you can just have a can and people could put money into the can.
You don't need to get somebody else's approval or cooperation to do these
things.

But, in the Internet, you do need that. For instance if want to distribute a
text on the Internet, you need companies to help you do it. You can't do it by
yourself. So if you want to have a website, you need the support of an ISP or a
hosting company, and you need a domain name registrar. You need them to
continue to let you do what you're doing. So you're doing it effectively on
sufferance, not by right.

And if you want to receive money, you can't just hold out a can. You need the
cooperation of a payment company. And we saw that this makes all of our digital
activities vulnerable to suppression. We learned this when the United States
government launched a “distributed denial of service attack” (DDoS) against
WikiLeaks. Now I'm making a bit of joke because the words “distributed denial
of service attack” usually refer to a different kind of attack. But they fit
perfectly with what the United States did. The United States went to the
various kinds of network services that WikiLeaks depended on, and told them to
cut off service to WikiLeaks. And they did!

For instance, WikiLeaks had rented a virtual Amazon server, and the US
government told Amazon: “Cut off service for WikiLeaks.” And it did,
arbitrarily. And then, Amazon had certain domain names such as wikileaks.org.
The US government tried to get all those domains shut off. But it didn't
succeed, some of them were outside its control and were not shut off.

Then, there were the payment companies. The US went to PayPal and said: “Stop
transferring money to WikiLeaks or we'll make life difficult for you.” And
PayPal shut off payments to WikiLeaks. And then it went to Visa and Mastercard
and got them to shut off payments to WikiLeaks. Others started collecting money
on WikiLeaks' behalf and their accounts were shut off too. But in this case,
maybe something can be done. There's a company in Iceland which began
collecting money on behalf of WikiLeaks, and so Visa and Mastercard shut off
its account; it couldn't receive money from its customers either. And now, that
business is suing Visa and Mastercard apparently, under European Union law,
because Visa and Mastercard together have a near-monopoly. They're not allowed
to arbitrarily deny service to anyone.

Well, this is an example of how things need to be for all kinds of services
that we use in the Internet. If you rented a store to hand out statements of
what you think, or any other kind of information that you can lawfully
distribute, the landlord couldn't kick you out just because he didn't like what
you were saying. As long as you keep paying the rent, you have a right to
continue in that store for a certain agreed-on period of time that you signed.
So you have some rights that you can enforce. And they couldn't shut off your
telephone line because the phone company doesn't like what you said, or because
some powerful entity didn't like what you said and threatened the phone
company. No! As long as you pay the bills and obey certain basic rules, they
can't shut off your phone line. This is what it's like to have some rights!

Well, if we move our activities from the physical world to the virtual world,
then either we have the same rights in the virtual world, or we have been
harmed. So, the precarity of all our Internet activities is the last of the
menaces I wanted to mention.

Now I'd like to say that for more information about free software, look at
gnu.org. Also look at fsf.org, which is the website of the Free Software
Foundation. You can go there and find many ways you can help us, for instance.
You can also become a member of the Free Software Foundation through that site.
[…] There is also the Free Software Foundation of Europe fsfe.org. You can join
FSF Europe also. […]


BC:

    Tena koutou, tena koutou, tena koutou katoa. Today I have the privilege of
    introducing Richard Stallman, whose keynote speech is being sponsored by
    the School of Information Management at Victoria University of Wellington.

    Richard has been working to promote software freedom for over 25 years. In
    1983 he started the GNU project to develop a free operating system [the GNU
    system], and in 1985 he set up the Free Software Foundation. Every time you
    read or send a message to nz-libs, you use the Mailman software which is
    part of the GNU project. So whether you realize it or not, Richard's work
    has touched all of your lives.

    I like to describe him as the most influential person most people have
    never heard of, although he tells me that that cannot possibly be true
    because it cannot be tested.  RMS: We can't tell.  BC:

    I said that—I still like it. His ideas about software freedom and free
    access to information were used by Tim Berners-Lee when he created the
    world's first web server, and in 1999 his musings about a free online
    encyclopedia inspired Jimmy Wales to set up what is now Wikipedia.

    Today Richard will be talking to us about copyright vs community in the age
    of computer networks, and their implications for libraries. Richard.  RMS:

    I've been in New Zealand for a couple of weeks, and in the North Island it
    was raining most of the time. Now I know why they call gumboots
    “Wellingtons”. And then I saw somebody who was making chairs and tables out
    of ponga wood, and he called it fern-iture. Then we took the ferry to get
    here, and as soon as we got off, people started mocking and insulting us;
    but there were no hard feelings, they just wanted to make us really feel
    Picton.

    The reason people usually invite me to give speeches is because of my work
    on free software. This is not a talk about free software; this talk answers
    the question whether the ideas of free software extend to other kinds of
    works. But in order for that to make sense, I'd better tell you briefly
    what free software means.

    Free software is a matter of freedom, not price, so think of “free speech”,
    not “free beer”. Free software is software that respects the user's
    freedom, and there are four specific freedoms that the user deserves always
    to have.

        Freedom 0 is the freedom to run the program as you wish.  Freedom 1 is
        the freedom to study the source code of the program and change it to
        make the program do what you wish.  Freedom 2 is the freedom to help
        your neighbour; that is, the freedom to redistribute copies of the
        program, exact copies when you wish.  And Freedom 3 is the freedom to
        contribute to your community. That's the freedom to publish your
        modified versions when you wish.

    If the program gives you these four freedoms then it's free software, which
    means the social system of its distribution and use is an ethical system,
    one which respects the user's freedom and the social solidarity of the
    user's community. But if one of these freedoms is missing or insufficient,
    then it's proprietary software, nonfree software, user-subjugating
    software. It's unethical. It's not a contribution to society, it's a power
    grab. This unethical practice should not exist; the goal of the free
    software movement is to put an end to it. All software should be free, so
    that all users can be free.

    Proprietary software keeps the users divided and helpless: divided, because
    they're forbidden to share it, and helpless, because they don't have the
    source code so they can't change it. They can't even study it to verify
    what it's really doing to them, and many proprietary programs have
    malicious features which spy on the user, restrict the user, even back
    doors to attack the user.

    For instance, Microsoft Windows has a back door with which Microsoft can
    forcibly install software changes, without getting permission from the
    supposed owner of the computer. You may think it's your computer, but if
    you've made the mistake of having Windows running in it, then really
    Microsoft has owned your computer. Computers need to be defenestrated,
    which means either throw Windows out of the computer, or throw the computer
    out the window.

    But any proprietary software gives the developers unjust power over the
    users. Some of the developers abuse this power more, and some abuse it
    less, but none of them ought to have it. You deserve to have control of
    your computing, and not be forcibly dependent on a particular company. So
    you deserve free software.

    At the end of speeches about free software, people sometimes ask whether
    these same freedoms and ideas apply to other things. If you have a copy of
    a published work on your computer, it makes sense to ask whether you should
    have the same four freedoms—whether it's ethically essential that you have
    them or not. And that's the question that I'm going to address today.

    If you have a copy of something that's not software, for the most part, the
    only thing that might deny you any of these freedoms is copyright law. With
    software that's not so. The main ways of making software nonfree are
    contracts and withholding the source code from the users. Copyright is a
    sort of secondary, back up method. For other things there's no such
    distinction as between source code and executable code.

    For instance, if we're talking about a text, if you can see the text to
    read it, there's nothing in the text that you can't see. So it's not the
    same kind of issue exactly as software. It's for the most part only
    copyright that might deny you these freedoms.

    So the question can be restated: “What should copyright law allow you to do
    with published works? What should copyright law say?”

    Copyright has developed along with copying technology, so it's useful to
    review the history of copying technology. Copying developed in the ancient
    world, where you'd use a writing instrument on a writing surface. You'd
    read one copy and write another.

    This technology was rather inefficient, but another interesting
    characteristic was that it had no economy of scale. To write ten copies
    would take ten times as long as to write one copy. It required no special
    equipment other than the equipment for writing, and it required no special
    skill other than literacy itself. The result was that copies of any
    particular book were made in a decentralized manner. Wherever there was a
    copy, if someone wanted to copy it, he could.

    There was nothing like copyright in the ancient world. If you had a copy
    and wanted to copy it, nobody was going to tell you you weren't
    allowed—except if the local prince didn't like what the book said, in which
    case he might punish you for copying it. But that's not copyright, but
    rather something closely related, namely censorship. To this day, copyright
    is often used in attempts to censor people.

    That went on for thousands of years, but then there was a big advance in
    copying technology, namely the printing press. The printing press made
    copying more efficient, but not uniformly. [This was] because mass
    production copying became a lot more efficient, but making one copy at a
    time didn't benefit from the printing press. In fact, you were better off
    just writing it by hand; that would be faster than trying to print one
    copy.

    The printing press has an economy of scale: it takes a lot of work to set
    the type, but then you can make many copies very fast. Also, the printing
    press and the type were expensive equipment that most people didn't own;
    and the ability to use them, most literate people didn't know. Using a
    press was a different skill from writing. The result was a centralized
    manner of producing copies: the copies of any given book would be made in a
    few places, and then they would be transported to wherever someone wanted
    to buy copies.

    Copyright began in the age of the printing press. Copyright in England
    began as a system of censorship in the 1500s. I believe it was originally
    meant to censor Protestants, but it was turned around and used to censor
    Catholics and presumably lots of others as well. According to this law, in
    order to publish a book you had to get permission from the Crown, and this
    permission was granted in the form of a perpetual monopoly to publish it.
    This was allowed to lapse in the 1680s, I believe [it expired in 1695
    according to the Wikipedia entry]. The publishers wanted it back again, but
    what they got was something somewhat different. The Statute of Anne gave
    authors a copyright, and only for 14 years, although the author could renew
    it once.

    This was a totally different idea—a temporary monopoly for the author,
    instead of a perpetual monopoly for the publisher. The idea developed that
    copyright was a means of promoting writing.

    When the US constitution was written, some people wanted authors to be
    entitled to a copyright, but that was rejected. Instead, the US
    Constitution says that Congress can optionally adopt a copyright law, and
    if there is a copyright law, its purpose is to promote progress. In other
    words, the purpose is not benefits for copyright holders or anybody they do
    business with, but for the general public. Copyright has to last a limited
    time; publishers keep hoping for us to forget about this.

    Here we have an idea of copyright which is an industrial regulation on
    publishers, controlled by authors, and designed to provide benefits to the
    public at large. It functioned this way because it didn't restrict the
    readers.

    Now in the early centuries of printing, and still I believe in the 1790s,
    lots of readers wrote copies by hand because they couldn't afford printed
    copies. Nobody ever expected copyright law to be something other than an
    industrial regulation. It wasn't meant to stop people from writing copies,
    it was meant to regulate the publishers. Because of this it was easy to
    enforce, uncontroversial, and arguably beneficial for society.

    It was easy to enforce, because it only had to be enforced against
    publishers. And it's easy to find the unauthorized publishers of a book—you
    go to a bookstore and say “where do these copies come from?”. You don't
    have to invade everybody's home and everybody's computer to do that.

    It was uncontroversial because, as the readers were not restricted, they
    had nothing to complain about. Theoretically they were restricted from
    publishing, but not being publishers and not having printing presses, they
    couldn't do that anyway. In what they actually could do, they were not
    restricted.

    It was arguably beneficial because the general public, according to the
    concepts of copyright law, traded away a theoretical right they were not in
    a position to exercise. In exchange, they got the benefits of more writing.

    Now if you trade away something you have no possible use for, and you get
    something you can use in exchange, it's a positive trade. Whether or not
    you could have gotten a better deal some other way, that's a different
    question, but at least it's positive.

    So if this were still in the age of the printing press, I don't think I'd
    be complaining about copyright law. But the age of the printing press is
    gradually giving way to the age of the computer networks—another advance in
    copying technology that makes copying more efficient, and once again not
    uniformly so.

    Here's what we had in the age of the printing press: mass production very
    efficient, one at a time copying still just as slow as the ancient world.
    Digital technology gets us here: they've both benefited, but one-off
    copying has benefited the most.

    We get to a situation much more like the ancient world, where one at a time
    copying is not so much worse [i.e., harder] than mass production copying.
    It's a little bit less efficient, a little bit less good, but it's
    perfectly cheap enough that hundreds of millions of people do it. Consider
    how many people write CDs once in a while, even in poor countries. You may
    not have a CD-writer yourself, so you go to a store where you can do it.

    This means that copyright no longer fits in with the technology as it used
    to. Even if the words of copyright law had not changed, they wouldn't have
    the same effect. Instead of an industrial regulation on publishers
    controlled by authors, with the benefits set up to go to the public, it is
    now a restriction on the general public, controlled mainly by the
    publishers, in the name of the authors.

    In other words, it's tyranny. It's intolerable and we can't allow it to
    continue this way.

    As a result of this change, [copyright] is no longer easy to enforce, no
    longer uncontroversial, and no longer beneficial.

    It's no longer easy to enforce because now the publishers want to enforce
    it against each and every person, and to do this requires cruel measures,
    draconian punishments, invasions of privacy, abolition of our basic ideas
    of justice. There's almost no limit to how far they will propose to go to
    prosecute the War on Sharing.

    It's no longer uncontroversial. There are political parties in several
    countries whose basic platform is “freedom to share”.

    It's no longer beneficial because the freedoms that we conceptually traded
    away (because we couldn't exercise them), we now can exercise. They're
    tremendously useful, and we want to exercise them.

    What would a democratic government do in this situation?

    It would reduce copyright power. It would say: “The trade we made on behalf
    of our citizens, trading away some of their freedom which now they need, is
    intolerable. We have to change this; we can't trade away the freedom that
    is important.” We can measure the sickness of democracy by the tendency of
    governments to do the exact opposite around the world, extending copyright
    power when they should reduce it.

    One example is in the dimension of time. Around the world we see pressure
    to make copyright last longer and longer and longer.

    A wave of this started in the US in 1998. Copyright was extended by 20
    years on both past and future works. I do not understand how they hope to
    convince the now dead or senile writers of the 20s and 30s to write more
    back then by extending copyright on their works now. If they have a time
    machine with which to inform them, they haven't used it. Our history books
    don't say that there was a burst of vigor in the arts in the 20s when all
    the artists found out that their copyrights would be extended in 1998.

    It's theoretically conceivable that 20 years more copyright on future works
    would convince people to make more effort in producing those works. But not
    anyone rational, because the discounted present value of 20 more years of
    copyright starting 75 years in the future—if it's a work made for hire—and
    probably even longer if it's a work with an individual copyright holder, is
    so small it couldn't persuade any rational person to do anything different.
    Any business that wants to claim otherwise ought to present its projected
    balance sheets for 75 years in the future, which of course they can't do
    because none of them really looks that far ahead.

    The real reason for this law, the desire that prompted various companies to
    purchase this law in the US Congress, which is how laws are decided on for
    the most part, was they had lucrative monopolies and they wanted those
    monopolies to continue.

    For instance, Disney was aware that the first film in which Mickey Mouse
    appeared would go into the public domain in a few years, and then anybody
    would be free to draw that same character as part of other works. Disney
    didn't want that to happen. Disney borrows a lot from the public domain,
    but is determined never to give the slightest thing back. So Disney paid
    for this law, which we refer to as the Mickey Mouse Copyright Act.

    The movie companies say they want perpetual copyright, but the US
    Constitution won't let them get that officially. So they came up with a way
    to get the same result unofficially: “perpetual copyright on the
    installment plan”. Every 20 years they extend copyright for 20 more years.
    So that at any given time, any given work has a date when it will
    supposedly fall into the public domain. But that date is like tomorrow, it
    never comes. By the time you get there they will have postponed it, unless
    we stop them next time.

    That's one dimension, the dimension of duration. But even more important is
    the dimension of breadth: which uses of the work does copyright cover?

    In the age of the printing press, copyright wasn't supposed to cover all
    uses of a copyrighted work, because copyright regulated certain uses that
    were the exceptions in a broader space of unregulated uses. There were
    certain things you were simply allowed to do with your copy of a book.

    Now the publishers have got the idea that they can turn our computers
    against us, and use them to seize total power over all use of published
    works. They want to set up a pay-per-view universe. They're doing it with
    DRM (Digital Restrictions Management)—the intentional features of software
    that's designed to restrict the user. And often the computer itself is
    designed to restrict the user.

    The first way in which the general public saw this was in DVDs. A movie on
    a DVD was usually encrypted, and the format was secret. The DVD conspiracy
    kept this secret because they said anyone that wants to make DVD players
    has to join the conspiracy, promise to keep the format secret, and promise
    to design the DVD players to restrict the users according to the rules,
    which say it has to stop the user from doing this, from doing that, from
    doing that—a precise set of requirements, all of which are malicious
    towards us.

    It worked for a while, but then some people figured out the secret format,
    and published free software capable of reading the movie on a DVD and
    playing it. Then the publishers said “since we can't actually stop them, we
    have to make it a crime”. And they started that in the US in 1998 with the
    Digital Millennium Copyright Act, which imposed censorship on software
    capable of doing such jobs.

    So that particular piece of free software was the subject of a court case.
    Its distribution in the US is forbidden; the US practices censorship of
    software.

    The movie companies are well aware that they can't really make that program
    disappear—it's easy enough to find it. So they designed another encryption
    system, which they hoped would be harder to break, and it's called AACS, or
    the axe.

    The AACS conspiracy makes precise rules about all players. For instance, in
    2011 it's going to be forbidden to make analog video outputs. So all video
    outputs will have to be digital, and they will carry the signal encrypted
    into a monitor specially designed to keep secrets from the user. That is
    malicious hardware. They say that the purpose of this is to “close the
    analog hole”. I'll show you a couple of analog holes (Stallman takes off
    his glasses): here's one and here's another, that they'd like to poke out
    permanently.[1]

    How do I know about these conspiracies? The reason is they're not
    secret—they have websites. The AACS website proudly describes the contracts
    that manufacturers have to sign, which is how I know about this
    requirement. It proudly states the names of the companies that have
    established this conspiracy, which include Microsoft and Apple, and Intel,
    and Sony, and Disney, and IBM.

    A conspiracy of companies designed to restrict the public's access to
    technology ought to be prosecuted as a serious crime, like a conspiracy to
    fix prices, except it's worse, so the prison sentences for this should be
    longer. But these companies are quite confident that our governments are on
    their side against us. They have no fear against being prosecuted for these
    conspiracies, which is why they don't bother to hide them.

    In general DRM is set up by a conspiracy of companies. Once in a while a
    single company can do it, but generally it requires a conspiracy between
    technology companies and publishers, so [it's] almost always a conspiracy.

    They thought that nobody would ever be able to break the AACS, but about
    three and a half years ago someone released a free program capable of
    decrypting that format. However, it was totally useless, because in order
    to run it you need to know the key.

    And then, six months later, I saw a photo of two adorable puppies, with 32
    hex digits above them, and I wondered: “Why put those two things together?
    I wonder if those numbers are some important key, and someone could have
    put the numbers together with the puppies, figuring people would copy the
    photo of the puppies because they were so cute. This would protect the key
    from being wiped out.”

    And that's what it was—that was the key to break the axe. People posted it,
    and editors deleted it, because laws in many countries now conscript them
    to censor this information. It was posted again, they deleted it;
    eventually they gave up, and in two weeks this number was posted in over
    700,000 web sites.

    That's a big outpouring of public disgust with DRM. But it didn't win the
    war, because the publishers changed the key. Not only that: with HD DVD,
    this was adequate to break the DRM, but not with Blu-ray. Blu-ray has an
    additional level of DRM and so far there is no free software that can break
    it, which means that you must regard Blu-ray disks as something
    incompatible with your own freedom. They are an enemy with which no
    accommodation is possible, at least not with our present level of
    knowledge.

    Never accept any product designed to attack your freedom. If you don't have
    the free software to play a DVD, you mustn't buy or rent any DVDs, or
    accept them even as gifts, except for the rare non-encrypted DVDs, which
    there are a few of. I actually have a few [of these]—I don't have any
    encrypted DVDs, I won't take them.

    So this is how things stand in video, but we've also seen DRM in music.

    For instance, about ten years ago we started to see things that looked like
    compact disks, but they weren't written quite like compact disks. They
    didn't follow the standard. We called them 'corrupt disks', and the idea of
    them was that they would play in an audio player, but it was impossible to
    read them on a computer. These different methods had various problems.

    Eventually Sony came up with a clever idea. They put a program on the disk,
    so that if you stuck the disk into a computer, the disk would install the
    program. This program was designed like a virus to take control of the
    system. It's called a 'root kit', meaning that it has things in it to break
    the security of the system so that it can install the software deep inside
    the system, and modify various parts of the system.

    For instance, it modified the command you could use to examine the system
    to see if the software was present, so as to disguise itself. It modified
    the command you could use to delete some of these files, so that it
    wouldn't really delete them. Now all of this is a serious crime, but it's
    not the only one Sony committed, because the software also included free
    software code—code that had been released under the GNU General Public
    License.

    Now the GNU GPL is a copyleft license, and that means it says “Yes, you're
    free to put this code into other things, but when you do, the entire
    program that you put things into you must release as free software under
    the same license. And you must make the source code available to users, and
    to inform them of their rights you must give them a copy of this license
    when they get the software.”

    Sony didn't comply with all that. That's commercial copyright infringement,
    which is a felony. They're both felonies, but Sony wasn't prosecuted
    because the government understands that the purpose of the government and
    the law is to maintain the power of those companies over us, not to help
    defend our freedom in any way.

    People got angry and they sued Sony. However, they made a mistake. They
    focused their condemnation not on the evil purpose of this scheme, but only
    on the secondary evils of the various methods that Sony used. So Sony
    settled the lawsuits and promised that in the future, when it attacks our
    freedom, it will not do those other things.

    Actually, that particular corrupt disk scheme was not so bad, because if
    you were not using Windows it would not affect you at all. Even if you were
    using Windows, there's a key on the keyboard—if you remembered every time
    to hold it down, then the disk wouldn't install the software. But of course
    it's hard to remember that every time; you're going to slip up some day.
    This shows the kind of thing we've had to deal with.

    Fortunately music DRM is receding. Even the main record companies sell
    downloads without DRM. But we see a renewed effort to impose DRM on books.

    You see, the publishers want to take away the traditional freedoms of book
    readers—freedom to do things such as borrow a book from the public library,
    or lend it to a friend; to sell a book to a used book store, or buy it
    anonymously paying cash (which is the only way I buy books—we've got to
    resist the temptations to let Big Brother know everything that we're
    doing.)

    Even the freedom to keep the book as long as you wish, and read it as many
    times as you wish, they plan to get rid of.

    The way they do it is with DRM. They knew that so many people read books
    and would get angry if these freedoms were taken away that they didn't
    believe they could buy a law specifically to abolish these freedoms—there
    would be too much opposition. Democracy is sick, but once in a while people
    manage to demand something. So they came up with a two-stage plan.

    First, take away these freedoms from ebooks, and second, convince people to
    switch from paper books to ebooks. They've succeeded with stage 1.

    In the US they did it with the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, and in New
    Zealand, that was part of the year-ago Copyright Act; censorship on
    software that can break DRM was part of that law. That's an unjust
    provision; it's got to be repealed.

    The second stage is convince people to switch from printed books to ebooks;
    that didn't go so well.

    One publisher in 2001 had the idea they would make their line of ebooks
    really popular if they started it with my biography. So they found an
    author and the author asked me if I'd cooperate, and I said “Only if this
    ebook is published without encryption, without DRM”. The publisher wouldn't
    go along with that, and I just stuck to it—I said no. Eventually we found
    another publisher who was willing to do this—in fact willing to publish the
    book under a free license giving you the four freedoms—so the book was then
    published, and sold a lot of copies on paper.

    But in any case, ebooks failed at the beginning of this decade. People just
    didn't want to read them very much. And I said, “they will try again”. We
    saw an amazing number of news articles about electronic ink (or is it
    electronic paper, I can never remember which), and it occurred to me
    probably the reason there's so many is the publishers want us to think
    about this. They want us to be eager for the next generation of ebook
    readers.

    Now they're upon us. Things like the Sony Shreader (its official name is
    the Sony Reader, but if you put on 'sh' it explains what it's designed to
    do to your books), and the Amazon Swindle, designed to swindle you out of
    your traditional freedoms without your noticing. Of course, they call it
    the Kindle which is what it's going to do to your books.

    The Kindle is an extremely malicious product, almost as malicious as
    Microsoft Windows. They both have spy features, they both have Digital
    Restrictions Management, and they both have back doors.

    In the case of the Kindle, the only way you can buy a book is to buy it
    from Amazon, and Amazon requires you to identify yourself, so they know
    everything that you've bought.

    Then there is Digital Restrictions Management, so you can't lend the book
    or sell it to a used bookstore, and the library can't lend it either.

    And then there's the back door, which we found out about about three months
    ago, because Amazon used it. Amazon sent a command to all the Kindles to
    erase a particular book, namely 1984 by George Orwell. Yes, they couldn't
    have picked a more ironic book to erase. So that's how we know that Amazon
    has a back door with which it can erase books remotely.

    What else it can do, who knows? Maybe it's like Microsoft Windows. Maybe
    Amazon can remotely upgrade the software, which means that whatever
    malicious things are not in it now, they could put them in it tomorrow.

    This is intolerable—any one of these restrictions is intolerable. They want
    to create a world where nobody lends books to anybody anymore.

    Imagine that you visit a friend and there are no books on the shelf. It's
    not that your friend doesn't read, but his books are all inside a device,
    and of course he can't lend you those books. The only way he could lend you
    any one of those books is to lend you his whole library, which is obviously
    a ridiculous thing to ask anybody to do. So there goes friendship for
    people who love books.

    Make sure that you inform people what this device implies. It means other
    readers will no longer be your friends, because you will be acting like a
    jerk toward them. Spread the word preemptively. This device is your enemy.
    It's the enemy of everyone who reads. The people who don't recognize that
    are the people who are thinking so short-term that they don't see it. It's
    our job to help them see beyond the momentary convenience to the
    implications of this device.

    I have nothing against distributing books in digital form, if they are not
    designed to take away our freedom. Strictly speaking, it is possible to
    have an ebook reader:

        that is not designed to attack you, which runs free software and not
        proprietary software, which doesn't have DRM, which doesn't make people
        identify yourself to get a book, which doesn't have a back door, [and]
        which doesn't restrict what you can do with the files on your machine.

    It's possible, but the big companies really pushing ebooks are doing it to
    attack our freedom, and we mustn't stand for that. This is what governments
    are doing in cahoots with big business to attack our freedom, by making
    copyright harsher and nastier, more restrictive than ever before.

    But what should they do? Governments should make copyright power less. Here
    are my specific proposals.

    First of all, there is the dimension of time. I propose copyright should
    last ten years, starting from the date of publication of a work.

    Why from the date of publication? Because before that, we don't have
    copies. It doesn't matter to us whether we would have been allowed to copy
    our copies that we don't have, so I figure we might as well let the authors
    have as much time as it takes to arrange publication, and then start the
    clock.

    But why ten years? I don't know about in this country, but in the US, the
    publication cycle has got shorter and shorter. Nowadays almost all books
    are remaindered within two years and out-of-print within three. So ten
    years is more than three times the usual publication cycle—that should be
    plenty comfortable.

    But not everybody agrees. I once proposed this in a panel discussion with
    fiction writers, and the award-winning fantasy writer next to me said “Ten
    years? No way. Anything more than five years is intolerable.” You see, he
    had a legal dispute with his publisher. His books seemed to be out of
    print, but the publisher wouldn't admit it. The publisher was using the
    copyright on his own book to stop him from distributing copies himself,
    which he wanted to do so people could read it.

    This is what every artist starts out wanting—wanting to distribute her work
    so it will get read and appreciated. Very few make a lot of money. That
    tiny fraction face the danger of being morally corrupted, like J.K.
    Rowling.

    J.K. Rowling, in Canada, got an injunction against people who had bought
    her book in a bookstore, ordering them not to read it. So in response I
    call for a boycott of Harry Potter books. But I don't say you shouldn't
    read them; I leave that to the author and the publisher. I just say you
    shouldn't buy them.

    It's few authors that make enough money that they can be corrupted in this
    way. Most of them don't get anywhere near that, and continue wanting the
    same thing they wanted at the outset: they want their work to be
    appreciated.

    He wanted to distribute his own book, and copyright was stopping him. He
    realized that more than five years of copyright was unlikely to ever do him
    any good.

    If people would rather have copyright last five years, I won't be against
    it. I propose ten as a first stab at the problem. Let's reduce it to ten
    years and then take stock for a while, and we could adjust it after that. I
    don't say I think ten years is the exact right number—I don't know.

    What about the dimension of breadth? Which activities should copyright
    cover? I distinguish three broad categories of works.

    First of all, there are the functional works that you use to do a practical
    job in your life. This includes software, recipes, educational works,
    reference works, text fonts, and other things you can think of. These works
    should be free.

    If you use the work to do a job in your life, then if you can't change the
    work to suit you, you don't control your life. Once you have changed the
    work to suit you, then you've got to be free to publish it—publish your
    version—because there will be others who will want the changes you've made.

    This leads quickly to the conclusion that users have to have the same four
    freedoms [for all functional works], not just for software. And you'll
    notice that for recipes, practically speaking, cooks are always sharing and
    changing recipes just as if the recipes were free. Imagine how people would
    react if the government tried to stamp out so-called “recipe piracy”.

    The term “pirate” is pure propaganda. When people ask me what I think of
    music piracy, I say “As far as I know, when pirates attack they don't do it
    by playing instruments badly, they do it with arms. So it's not music
    “piracy”, because piracy is attacking ships, and sharing is as far as you
    get from being the moral equivalent of attacking ships”. Attacking ships is
    bad, sharing with other people is good, so we should firmly denounce that
    propaganda term “piracy” whenever we hear it.

    People might have objected twenty years ago: “If we don't give up our
    freedom, if we don't let the publishers of these works control us, the
    works won't get made and that will be a horrible disaster.” Now, looking at
    the free software community, and all the recipes that circulate, and
    reference works like Wikipedia—we are even starting to see free textbooks
    being published—we know that that fear is misguided.

    There is no need to despair and give up our freedom thinking that otherwise
    the works won't get made. There are lots of ways to encourage them to get
    made if we want more—lots of ways that are consistent with and respect our
    freedom. In this category, they should all be free.

    But what about the second category, of works that say what certain people
    thought, like memoirs, essays of opinion, scientific papers, and various
    other things?[2] To publish a modified version of somebody else's statement
    of what he thought is misrepresenting [that] somebody. That's not
    particularly a contribution to society.

    Therefore it is workable and acceptable to have a somewhat reduced
    copyright system where all commercial use is covered by copyright, all
    modification is covered by copyright, but everyone is free to
    non-commercially redistribute exact copies.

    [2015 note: publishing scientific papers under the CC Attribution license
    (CC-BY) is widely done, in accessible journals and arXiv.org, and it works
    well, so that is what I now recommend for scholarly publications.]

    That freedom is the minimum freedom we must establish for all published
    works, because the denial of that freedom is what creates the War on
    Sharing—what creates the vicious propaganda that sharing is theft, that
    sharing is like being a pirate and attacking ships. Absurdities, but
    absurdities backed by a lot of money that has corrupted our governments. We
    need to end the War on Sharing; we need to legalize sharing exact copies of
    any published work.

    In the second category of works, that's all we need; we don't need to make
    them free. Therefore I think it's OK to have a reduced copyright system
    which covers commercial use and all modifications. And this will provide a
    revenue stream to the authors in more or less the same (usually inadequate)
    way as the present system. You've got to keep in mind [that] the present
    system, except for superstars, is usually totally inadequate.

    What about works of art and entertainment? Here it took me a while to
    decide what to think about modifications.

    You see, on one hand, a work of art can have an artistic integrity and
    modifying it could destroy that. Of course, copyright doesn't necessarily
    stop works from being butchered that way. Hollywood does it all the time.
    On the other hand, modifying the work can be a contribution to art. It
    makes possible the folk process which leads to things which are beautiful
    and rich.

    Even if we look at named authors only: consider Shakespeare, who borrowed
    stories from other works only a few decades old, and did them in different
    ways, and made important works of literature. If today's copyright law had
    existed then, that would have been forbidden and those plays wouldn't have
    been written.

    But eventually I realized that modifying a work of art can be a
    contribution to art, but it's not desperately urgent in most cases. If you
    had to wait ten years for the copyright to expire, you could wait that
    long. Not like the present-day copyright that makes you wait maybe 75
    years, or 95 years. In Mexico you might have to wait almost 200 years in
    some cases, because copyright in Mexico expires a hundred years after the
    author dies. This is insane, but ten years, as I've proposed copyright
    should last, that people can wait.

    So I propose the same partly reduced copyright that covers commercial use
    and modification, but everyone's got to be free to non-commercially
    redistribute exact copies. After ten years it goes into the public domain,
    and people can contribute to art by publishing their modified versions.

    One other thing: if you're going to take little pieces out of a bunch of
    works and rearrange them into something totally different, that should just
    be legal, because the purpose of copyright is to promote art, not to
    obstruct art. It's stupid to apply copyright to using snippets like
    that—it's self-defeating. It's a kind of distortion that you'd only get
    when the government is under the control of the publishers of the existing
    successful works, and has totally lost sight of its intended purpose.

    That's what I propose, and in particular, this means that sharing copies on
    the Internet must be legal. Sharing is good. Sharing builds the bonds of
    society. To attack sharing is to attack society.

    So any time the government proposes some new means to attack people who
    share, to stop them from sharing, we have to recognize that this is evil,
    not just because the means proposed almost invariably offend basic ideas of
    justice (but that's not a coincidence). The reason is because the purpose
    is evil. Sharing is good and the government should encourage sharing.

    But copyright did after all have a useful purpose. Copyright as a means to
    carry out that purpose has a problem now, because it doesn't fit in with
    the technology we use. It interferes with all the vital freedoms for all
    the readers, listeners, viewers, and whatever, but the goal of promoting
    the arts is still desirable. So in addition to the partly reduced copyright
    system, which would continue to be a copyright system, I propose two other
    methods.

    One [works via] taxes—distribute tax money directly to artists. This could
    be a special tax, perhaps on Internet connectivity, or it could come from
    general revenue, because it won't be that much money in total, not if it's
    distributed in an efficient way. To distribute it efficiently to promote
    the arts means not in linear proportion to popularity. It should be based
    on popularity, because we don't want bureaucrats to have the discretion to
    decide which artists to support and which to ignore, but based on
    popularity does not imply linear proportion.

    What I propose is measure the popularity of the various artists, which you
    could do through polling (samples) in which nobody is required to
    participate, and then take the cube root. The cube root looks like this: it
    means basically that [the payment] tapers off after a while.

    If superstar A is a thousand times as popular as successful artist B, with
    this system A would get ten times as much money as B, not a thousand times.

    Linearly would give A a thousand times as much as B, which means that if we
    wanted B to get enough to live on we're going to have to make A
    tremendously rich. This is wasteful use of the tax money—it shouldn't be
    done.

    But if we make it taper off, then yes, each superstar will get handsomely
    more than an ordinary successful artist, but the total of all the
    superstars will be a small fraction of the [total] money. Most of the money
    will go to support a large number of fairly successful artists, fairly
    appreciated artists, fairly popular artists. Thus the system will use money
    a lot more efficiently than the existing system.

    The existing system is regressive. It actually gives far, far more per
    record, for instance, to a superstar than to anybody else. The money is
    extremely badly used. The result is we'd actually be paying a lot less this
    way. I hope that's enough to mollify some of these people who have a
    knee-jerk hostile reaction to taxes—one that I don't share, because I
    believe in a welfare state.

    I have another suggestion which is voluntary payments. Suppose every player
    had a button you could push to send a dollar to the artist who made the
    work you're currently playing or the last one you played. This money would
    be delivered anonymously to those artists. I think a lot of people would
    push that button fairly often.

    For instance, all of us could afford to push that button once every day,
    and we wouldn't miss that much money. It's not that much money for us, I'm
    pretty sure. Of course, there are poor people who couldn't afford to push
    it ever, and it's OK if they don't. We don't need to squeeze money out of
    poor people to support the artists. There are enough people who are not
    poor to do the job just fine. I'm sure you're aware that a lot of people
    really love certain art and are really happy to support the artists.

    An idea just came to me. The player could also give you a certificate of
    having supported so-and-so, and it could even count up how many times you
    had done it and give you a certificate that says “I sent so much to these
    artists”. There are various ways we could encourage people who want to do
    it.

    For instance, we could have a PR campaign which is friendly and kind: “Have
    you sent a dollar to some artists today? Why not? It's only a dollar—you'll
    never miss it and don't you love what they're doing? Push the button!” It
    will make people feel good, and they'll think “Yeah, I love what I just
    watched. I'll send a dollar.”

    This is already starting to work to some extent. There's a Canadian singer
    who used to be called Jane Siberry. She put her music on her website and
    invited people to download it and pay whatever amount they wished. She
    reported getting an average of more than a dollar per copy, which is
    interesting because the major record companies charge just under a dollar
    per copy. By letting people decide whether and how much to pay, she got
    more—she got even more per visitor who was actually downloading something.
    But this might not even count whether there was an effect of bringing more
    people to come, and [thus] increasing the total number that this average
    was against.

    So it can work, but it's a pain in the neck under present circumstances.
    You've got to have a credit card to do it, and that means you can't do it
    anonymously. And you've got to go find where you're going to pay, and the
    payment systems for small amounts, they're not very efficient, so the
    artists are only getting half of it. If we set up a good system for this,
    it would work far, far better.

    So these are my two suggestions.

    And in mecenatglobal.org, you can find another scheme that combines aspects
    of the two, which was invented by Francis Muguet and designed to fit in
    with existing legal systems better to make it easier to enact.

    Be careful of proposals to “compensate the rights holders”, because when
    they say “compensate”, they're trying to presume that if you have
    appreciated a work, you now have a specific debt to somebody, and that you
    have to “compensate” that somebody. When they say “rights holders”, it's
    supposed to make you think it's supporting artists while in fact it's going
    to the publishers—the same publishers who basically exploit all the artists
    (except the few that you've all heard of, who are so popular that they have
    clout).

    We don't owe a debt; we have nobody that we have to “compensate”. [But]
    supporting the arts is still a useful thing to do. That was the motivation
    for copyright back when copyright fit in with the technology of the day.
    Today copyright is a bad way to do it, but it's still good to do it other
    ways that respect our freedom.

    Demand that they change the two evil parts of the New Zealand Copyright
    Act. They shouldn't replace the three strikes punishment[3], because
    sharing is good, and they've got to get rid of the censorship for the
    software to break DRM. Beware of ACTA—they're trying to negotiate a treaty
    between various countries, for all of these countries to attack their
    citizens, and we don't know how because they won't tell us.

There are a number of reasons why I'm not a communist. The first of them is
that I'm not against the idea of private business, as long as it does not
oppose people's human rights and the interests of society. Business is
legitimate as long as it treats the rest of society decently.

Computing is a new area of human life. So we have to think about the human
rights associated with this. What are the human rights software users are
entitled to? Four freedoms define Free Software. A programme is Free Software
for a user if:

    Freedom 0: Run the software as you wish.  Freedom 1: Share the source code
    and change it.  Freedom 2: Help your neighbour and distribute and publish.
    Freedom 3: Help your community and distribute your modified versions.

With these 4 Freedoms, you can live an upright life with your community. If you
use nonfree, proprietary software, the developer has the power to decide what
you can do. He can use that power over you. Like Microsoft. That game is evil.
Nobody should play it. So it's not a question of beating Microsoft at its game.
I set out to get away from that game.

Once GNU-Linux was ready in 1992, it began to catch on. It was reliable,
powerful, cheap and flexible. Thousands and millions of people began to use
GNU-Linux. But the ideals of freedom began to be forgotten though. In 1998,
people stopped talking about Free Software. Instead they said “open source”.
That was a way of not saying “free” and not mentioning the ideas behind it. I
don't disagree with that, but that's not what I am interested in. What I'm
really interested in most of all is to teach people to value their freedoms and
to fight for them. In software, as in the US, our freedom is threatened. So the
basic things we need to do are: remember our freedom frequently, value it and
insist on it. When someone says they protect me from terrorism by taking away
my freedom—say No! Similarly, with software that threatens our freedom, that
might give us some temporary comparative advantage—we should say No!

West Bengal should not follow the world trend. It should stand up for freedom.
That's different. No! I'm not going to let the world lead me where it wants to
go. I'm going where freedom is. If you're going elsewhere—I'm not going there.
It requires firmness, it requires a decision that says freedom matters and
hence it must be promoted. Even if that's inconvenient. Freedom needs some
sacrifices, some inconvenience, some price. But it's a small price to pay.

By globalisation, people usually mean globalisation of the power of business.
Business should not have political power. Otherwise democracy becomes sick. And
with globalisation of business power, this political power is enhanced. Free
trade treaties are designed to attack democracy. For instance, it explicitly
allows any business to sue government if a law makes its profit less than it
has been. Companies have to be paid for the permission to do anything of social
or environmental importance. Not all free trade treaties do this explicitly.
They do it implicitly. Companies can threaten to move away elsewhere. And they
do use this threat. This actually happened some years ago, with the EU software
patents. The govt of Denmark was threatened that if they did not support this
the company would move the business elsewhere. This tiny threat was sufficient
to blackmail the govt of Denmark. If you allow a foreign mega-corporation to
buy a domestic corporation, you are allowing it to buy a weapon pointed against
your country. The environment, public health, general standards of living—are
all important, and free trade treaties should be abolished. They are harmful to
freedom, health and the lives of people.

I do not accept the term “intellectual property”. The very term is biased and
confusing. It talks about useful techniques and works. It presumes they are
“property”. It prejudges such questions. There's also a more subtle problem. It
lumps together all the diverse things and makes it look like you can talk about
all of them together. Copyright, patents, trade laws—are all very different. It
takes the geatest efforts of the best scholars to overcome the confusion caused
by the term “intellectual property” and to discuss the details of these
individual items. The GATT Treaty and the TRIPS—actually it should be called
Trade-related Impediments to Education and Science. Free trade and enhancement
of world trade harms democracy. When you globalise something evil, it becomes a
greater evil. And when you globalise something good, it becomes a greater good.
Human knowledge and cooperation are such “goods”. The Free Software Movement is
a part of that. It is the globalisation of one area of human knowledge, namely
software. Through global cooperation like this, you get freedom and
independence for every region and every country.

Proprietary software is a colonial system. It's electronic colonialism. And not
by a country, but by a corporation. Electronic colonial powers keep people
divided and helpless. Look at the end-user licensing agreement. You don't have
the source code, you are helpless. You can't share, and so you are kept
divided. National colonial powers recruit local elites and pay them and keep
them above the rest of the people, working for the colonial masters. Today we
see electronic colonial powers recruit native zamindars to keep the system
intact. Microsoft sets up a research facility and in exchange it keeps its grip
firmly on everyone else. Govts and schools are in their grip. They know how to
do this. They know how to buy govt support. But what's the govt buying?
Dependency, not development. Only Free Software constitutes development. It
enables any activity to be fully under the control of the people doing it. Free
Software is appropriate technology. Proprietary software is not appropriate for
any use.

The West Bengal govt has an opportunity to adopt a policy of firm leadership in
this regard. This will give a boost to human resource development. Free
Software respects people's freedom. Govt has an influence on the future of
society. Choosing which software to teach students: if you teach them Windows,
they will be Windows users. For something else, they need to learn, and make
the effort to learn something else. Microsoft knows this. So it donates Windows
to schools. Addiction (through using unauthorised software use) only helps
them. They didn't want to leave anything to choice, so they give Windows free
to schools. Like injecting a dose. The first dose is gratis. Afterwards it's
not gratis, either for them or their employers. This is a way to impose their
power on the rest of society and its future. Schools have a mission to society.
This mission requires teaching students to live in freedom, teaching skills to
make it easy to live in freedom. This means using Free Software.

Free Software is good for computer science education, to maximise the potential
of natural programmers. It gives students the opportunity to really learn. It's
good for the natural programmers. If you have proprietary software, the teacher
says “I don't know”, “You are not allowed to know, it's a secret.” So the
alternative is to give him the source codes and let him read it all. They will
then learn to be really good programmers. But the most crucial reason is for
the sake of moral education. Teaching them to be good corporations and
benevolent, helpful citizens. This has to be taught. School has to teach by
example. If you bring software to class, you must share this with other kids.
Or don't bring it. Schools must follow their own rule, by bringing Free
Software to class. Schools should use 100% Free Software. No proprietary
software should be used in schools. Public agencies, after a migration period,
should use Free Software. All software development must run on Free Software
platforms. And if it's released to the public, it must be Free Software. (Free:
as in free speech, not free beer.)

One easy and useful way to put Free Software in schools—is to participate in
the “1 Laptop per Child” programme. India recently pulled out of this
programme, I'm told. I'm told the Indian govt is making lots of laws to make
multinational corporations happy. Maybe this was to make Microsoft happy. Even
if India is not, West Bengal can participate in the 1 Laptop per child
programme. I can put them in touch with the people developing that machine.

The Govt of India is considering a vicious new copyright law, imitating US law,
in favour of large businesses, and against its citizens. The only emergency I
can see that requires this being rushed through is catastrophic shortfall in
the dream profits of some businesses! Foreigners should not have political
power. In my case, I don't.
